alice's adventures in wonderland 
lewis carroll 
the millennium fulcrum edition 3.0 
chapter i 
down the rabbit-hole 
alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister 
on the bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had 
peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no 
pictures or conversations in it, "and what is the use of a book,' 
thought alice "without pictures or conversation?' 
so she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, 
for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether 
the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble 
of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a white 
rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her. 
there was nothing so very remarkable in that; nor did alice 
think it so very much out of the way to hear the rabbit say to 
itself, "oh dear! oh dear! i shall be late!' (when she thought 
it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have 
wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural); 
but when the rabbit actually took a watch out of its waistcoat- 
pocket, and looked at it, and then hurried on, alice started to 
her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never 
before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to 
take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the 
field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop 
down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge. 
in another moment down went alice after it, never once 
considering how in the world she was to get out again. 
the rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, 
and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that alice had not a 
moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself 
falling down a very deep well. 
either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she 
had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to 
wonder what was going to happen next. first, she tried to look 
down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to 
see anything; then she looked at the sides of the well, and 
noticed that they were filled with cupboards and book-shelves; 
here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs. she 
took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was 
labelled "orange marmalade', but to her great disappointment it 
was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing 
somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she 
fell past it. 
"well!' thought alice to herself, "after such a fall as this, i 
shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs! how brave they'll 
all think me at home! why, i wouldn't say anything about it, 
even if i fell off the top of the house!' (which was very likely 
true.) 
down, down, down. would the fall never come to an end! "i 
wonder how many miles i've fallen by this time?' she said aloud. 
"i must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth. let 
me see: that would be four thousand miles down, i think-' (for, 
you see, alice had learnt several things of this sort in her 
lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a very good 
opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to 
listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) "-yes, 
that's about the right distance-but then i wonder what latitude 
or longitude i've got to?' (alice had no idea what latitude was, 
or longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to 
say.) 
presently she began again. "i wonder if i shall fall right 
through the earth! how funny it'll seem to come out among the 
people that walk with their heads downward! the antipathies, i 
think-' (she was rather glad there was no one listening, this 
time, as it didn't sound at all the right word) "-but i shall 
have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know. 
please, ma'am, is this new zealand or australia?' (and she tried 
to curtsey as she spoke-fancy curtseying as you're falling 
through the air! do you think you could manage it?) "and what 
an ignorant little girl she'll think me for asking! no, it'll 
never do to ask: perhaps i shall see it written up somewhere.' 
down, down, down. there was nothing else to do, so alice soon 
began talking again. "dinah'll miss me very much to-night, i 
should think!' (dinah was the cat.) "i hope they'll remember 
her saucer of milk at tea-time. dinah my dear! i wish you were 
down here with me! there are no mice in the air, i'm afraid, but 
you might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse, you know. 
but do cats eat bats, i wonder?' and here alice began to get 
rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of 
way, "do cats eat bats? do cats eat bats?' and sometimes, "do 
bats eat cats?' for, you see, as she couldn't answer either 
question, it didn't much matter which way she put it. she felt 
that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she 
was walking hand in hand with dinah, and saying to her very 
earnestly, "now, dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a 
bat?' when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of 
sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over. 
alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a 
moment: she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her 
was another long passage, and the white rabbit was still in 
sight, hurrying down it. there was not a moment to be lost: 
away went alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it 
say, as it turned a corner, "oh my ears and whiskers, how late 
it's getting!' she was close behind it when she turned the 
corner, but the rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found 
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps 
hanging from the roof. 
there were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; 
and when alice had been all the way down one side and up the 
other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle, 
wondering how she was ever to get out again. 
suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of 
solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, 
and alice's first thought was that it might belong to one of the 
doors of the hall; but, alas! either the locks were too large, or 
the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of 
them. however, on the second time round, she came upon a low 
curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little 
door about fifteen inches high: she tried the little golden key 
in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted! 
alice opened the door and found that it led into a small 
passage, not much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and 
looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw. 
how she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about 
among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but 
she could not even get her head though the doorway; "and even if 
my head would go through,' thought poor alice, "it would be of 
very little use without my shoulders. oh, how i wish 
i could shut up like a telescope! i think i could, if i only 
know how to begin.' for, you see, so many out-of-the-way things 
had happened lately, that alice had begun to think that very few 
things indeed were really impossible. 
there seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she 
went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on 
it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like 
telescopes: this time she found a little bottle on it, ("which 
certainly was not here before,' said alice,) and round the neck 
of the bottle was a paper label, with the words "drink me' 
beautifully printed on it in large letters. 
it was all very well to say "drink me,' but the wise little 
alice was not going to do that in a hurry. "no, i'll look 
first,' she said, "and see whether it's marked "poison" or not'; 
for she had read several nice little histories about children who 
had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant 
things, all because they would not remember the simple rules 
their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot poker 
will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your 
finger very deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had 
never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked 
"poison,' it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or 
later. 
however, this bottle was not marked "poison,' so alice ventured 
to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort 
of mixed flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast 
turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished 
it off. 
"what a curious feeling!' said alice; "i must be shutting up 
like a telescope.' 
and so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and 
her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right 
size for going through the little door into that lovely garden. 
first, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was 
going to shrink any further: she felt a little nervous about 
this; "for it might end, you know,' said alice to herself, "in my 
going out altogether, like a candle. i wonder what i should be 
like then?' and she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is 
like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember 
ever having seen such a thing. 
after a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided 
on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor alice! 
when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the 
little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, 
she found she could not possibly reach it: she could see it 
quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb 
up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; 
and when she had tired herself out with trying, 
the poor little thing sat down and cried. 
"come, there's no use in crying like that!' said alice to 
herself, rather sharply; "i advise you to leave off this minute!' 
she generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very 
seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so 
severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered 
trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game 
of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious 
child was very fond of pretending to be two people. "but it's no 
use now,' thought poor alice, "to pretend to be two people! why, 
there's hardly enough of me left to make one respectable 
person!' 
soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under 
the table: she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on 
which the words "eat me' were beautifully marked in currants. 
"well, i'll eat it,' said alice, "and if it makes me grow larger, 
i can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, i can creep 
under the door; so either way i'll get into the garden, and i 
don't care which happens!' 
she ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, "which 
way? which way?', holding her hand on the top of her head to 
feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to 
find that she remained the same size: to be sure, this generally 
happens when one eats cake, but alice had got so much into the 
way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen, 
that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the 
common way. 
so she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake. 
chapter ii 
the pool of tears 
"curiouser and curiouser!' cried alice (she was so much 
surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good 
english); "now i'm opening out like the largest telescope that 
ever was! good-bye, feet!' (for when she looked down at her 
feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so 
far off). "oh, my poor little feet, i wonder who will put on 
your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? i'm sure _i_ shan't 
be able! i shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself 
about you: you must manage the best way you can; -but i must be 
kind to them,' thought alice, "or perhaps they won't walk the 
way i want to go! let me see: i'll give them a new pair of 
boots every christmas.' 
and she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. 
"they must go by the carrier,' she thought; "and how funny it'll 
seem, sending presents to one's own feet! and how odd the 
directions will look! 
alice's right foot, esq. 
hearthrug, 
near the fender, 
(with alice's love). 
oh dear, what nonsense i'm talking!' 
just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in 
fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took 
up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door. 
poor alice! it was as much as she could do, lying down on one 
side, to look through into the garden with one eye; but to get 
through was more hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to 
cry again. 
"you ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said alice, "a great 
girl like you,' (she might well say this), "to go on crying in 
this way! stop this moment, i tell you!' but she went on all 
the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool 
all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the 
hall. 
after a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the 
distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. 
it was the white rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a 
pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the 
other: he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to 
himself as he came, "oh! the duchess, the duchess! oh! won't she 
be savage if i've kept her waiting!' alice felt so desperate 
that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the rabbit 
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, "if you please, 
sir-' the rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid 
gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard 
as he could go. 
alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very 
hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: 
"dear, dear! how queer everything is to-day! and yesterday 
things went on just as usual. i wonder if i've been changed in 
the night? let me think: was i the same when i got up this 
morning? i almost think i can remember feeling a little 
different. but if i'm not the same, the next question is, who in 
the world am i? ah, that's the great puzzle!' and she began 
thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age 
as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of 
them. 
"i'm sure i'm not ada,' she said, "for her hair goes in such 
long ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and i'm 
sure i can't be mabel, for i know all sorts of things, and she, 
oh! she knows such a very little! besides, she's she, and i'm i, 
and-oh dear, how puzzling it all is! i'll try if i know all the 
things i used to know. let me see: four times five is twelve, 
and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven is-oh dear! 
i shall never get to twenty at that rate! however, the 
multiplication table doesn't signify: let's try geography. 
london is the capital of paris, and paris is the capital of rome, 
and rome-no, that's all wrong, i'm certain! i must have been 
changed for mabel! i'll try and say "how doth the little-"' 
and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, 
and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and 
strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:- 
"how doth the little crocodile 
improve his shining tail, 
and pour the waters of the nile 
on every golden scale! 
"how cheerfully he seems to grin, 
how neatly spread his claws, 
and welcome little fishes in 
with gently smiling jaws!' 
"i'm sure those are not the right words,' said poor alice, and 
her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, "i must be mabel 
after all, and i shall have to go and live in that poky little 
house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so 
many lessons to learn! no, i've made up my mind about it; if i'm 
mabel, i'll stay down here! it'll be no use their putting their 
heads down and saying "come up again, dear!" i shall only look 
up and say "who am i then? tell me that first, and then, if i 
like being that person, i'll come up: if not, i'll stay down 
here till i'm somebody else"-but, oh dear!' cried alice, with a 
sudden burst of tears, "i do wish they would put their heads 
down! i am so very tired of being all alone here!' 
as she said this she looked down at her hands, and was 
surprised to see that she had put on one of the rabbit's little 
white kid gloves while she was talking. "how can i have done 
that?' she thought. "i must be growing small again.' she got up 
and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that, 
as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high, 
and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found out that the 
cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it 
hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether. 
"that was a narrow escape!' said alice, a good deal frightened at 
the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in 
existence; "and now for the garden!' and she ran with all speed 
back to the little door: but, alas! the little door was shut 
again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as 
before, "and things are worse than ever,' thought the poor child, 
"for i never was so small as this before, never! and i declare 
it's too bad, that it is!' 
as she said these words her foot slipped, and in another 
moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water. her first 
idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, "and in that 
case i can go back by railway,' she said to herself. (alice had 
been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general 
conclusion, that wherever you go to on the english coast you find 
a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in 
the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and 
behind them a railway station.) however, she soon made out that 
she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine 
feet high. 
"i wish i hadn't cried so much!' said alice, as she swam about, 
trying to find her way out. "i shall be punished for it now, i 
suppose, by being drowned in my own tears! that will be a queer 
thing, to be sure! however, everything is queer to-day.' 
just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a 
little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at 
first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then 
she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that 
it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself. 
"would it be of any use, now,' thought alice, "to speak to this 
mouse? everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that i should 
think very likely it can talk: at any rate, there's no harm in 
trying.' so she began: "o mouse, do you know the way out of 
this pool? i am very tired of swimming about here, o mouse!' 
(alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse: 
she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having 
seen in her brother's latin grammar, "a mouse-of a mouse-to a 
mouse-a mouse-o mouse!' the mouse looked at her rather 
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little 
eyes, but it said nothing. 
"perhaps it doesn't understand english,' thought alice; "i 
daresay it's a french mouse, come over with william the 
conqueror.' (for, with all her knowledge of history, alice had 
no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.) so she 
began again: "ou est ma chatte?' which was the first sentence in 
her french lesson-book. the mouse gave a sudden leap out of the 
water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright. "oh, i beg 
your pardon!' cried alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the 
poor animal's feelings. "i quite forgot you didn't like cats.' 
"not like cats!' cried the mouse, in a shrill, passionate 
voice. "would you like cats if you were me?' 
"well, perhaps not,' said alice in a soothing tone: "don't be 
angry about it. and yet i wish i could show you our cat dinah: 
i think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. 
she is such a dear quiet thing,' alice went on, half to herself, 
as she swam lazily about in the pool, "and she sits purring so 
nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face-and 
she is such a nice soft thing to nurse-and she's such a capital 
one for catching mice-oh, i beg your pardon!' cried alice again, 
for this time the mouse was bristling all over, and she felt 
certain it must be really offended. "we won't talk about her any 
more if you'd rather not.' 
"we indeed!' cried the mouse, who was trembling down to the end 
of his tail. "as if i would talk on such a subject! our family 
always hated cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! don't let me hear 
the name again!' 
"i won't indeed!' said alice, in a great hurry to change the 
subject of conversation. "are you-are you fond-of-of dogs?' 
the mouse did not answer, so alice went on eagerly: "there is 
such a nice little dog near our house i should like to show you! 
a little bright-eyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly 
brown hair! and it'll fetch things when you throw them, and 
it'll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of things-i 
can't remember half of them-and it belongs to a farmer, you 
know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred pounds! 
he says it kills all the rats and-oh dear!' cried alice in a 
sorrowful tone, "i'm afraid i've offended it again!' for the 
mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and 
making quite a commotion in the pool as it went. 
so she called softly after it, "mouse dear! do come back 
again, and we won't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't 
like them!' when the mouse heard this, it turned round and swam 
slowly back to her: its face was quite pale (with passion, alice 
thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, "let us get to 
the shore, and then i'll tell you my history, and you'll 
understand why it is i hate cats and dogs.' 
it was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded 
with the birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a 
duck and a dodo, a lory and an eaglet, and several other curious 
creatures. alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the 
shore. 
chapter iii 
a caucus-race and a long tale 
they were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the 
bank-the birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their 
fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and 
uncomfortable. 
the first question of course was, how to get dry again: they 
had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed 
quite natural to alice to find herself talking familiarly with 
them, as if she had known them all her life. indeed, she had 
quite a long argument with the lory, who at last turned sulky, 
and would only say, "i am older than you, and must know better'; 
and this alice would not allow without knowing how old it was, 
and, as the lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no 
more to be said. 
at last the mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among 
them, called out, "sit down, all of you, and listen to me! i'll 
soon make you dry enough!' they all sat down at once, in a large 
ring, with the mouse in the middle. alice kept her eyes 
anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad 
cold if she did not get dry very soon. 
"ahem!' said the mouse with an important air, "are you all ready? 
this is the driest thing i know. silence all round, if you please! 
"william the conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was 
soon submitted to by the english, who wanted leaders, and had been 
of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest. edwin and 
morcar, the earls of mercia and northumbria-"' 
"ugh!' said the lory, with a shiver. 
"i beg your pardon!' said the mouse, frowning, but very 
politely: "did you speak?' 
"not i!' said the lory hastily. 
"i thought you did,' said the mouse. "-i proceed. "edwin and 
morcar, the earls of mercia and northumbria, declared for him: 
and even stigand, the patriotic archbishop of canterbury, found 
it advisable-"' 
"found what?' said the duck. 
"found it,' the mouse replied rather crossly: "of course you 
know what "it" means.' 
"i know what "it" means well enough, when i find a thing,' said 
the duck: "it's generally a frog or a worm. the question is, 
what did the archbishop find?' 
the mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, 
""-found it advisable to go with edgar atheling to meet william 
and offer him the crown. william's conduct at first was 
moderate. but the insolence of his normans-" how are you 
getting on now, my dear?' it continued, turning to alice as it 
spoke. 
"as wet as ever,' said alice in a melancholy tone: "it doesn't 
seem to dry me at all.' 
"in that case,' said the dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, "i 
move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more 
energetic remedies-' 
"speak english!' said the eaglet. "i don't know the meaning of 
half those long words, and, what's more, i don't believe you do 
either!' and the eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: 
some of the other birds tittered audibly. 
"what i was going to say,' said the dodo in an offended tone, 
"was, that the best thing to get us dry would be a caucus-race.' 
"what is a caucus-race?' said alice; not that she wanted much 
to know, but the dodo had paused as if it thought that somebody 
ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything. 
"why,' said the dodo, "the best way to explain it is to do it.' 
(and, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter 
day, i will tell you how the dodo managed it.) 
first it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, ("the 
exact shape doesn't matter,' it said,) and then all the party 
were placed along the course, here and there. there was no "one, 
two, three, and away,' but they began running when they liked, 
and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know 
when the race was over. however, when they had been running half 
an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the dodo suddenly called 
out "the race is over!' and they all crowded round it, panting, 
and asking, "but who has won?' 
this question the dodo could not answer without a great deal of 
thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon 
its forehead (the position in which you usually see shakespeare, 
in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence. at 
last the dodo said, "everybody has won, and all must have 
prizes.' 
"but who is to give the prizes?' quite a chorus of voices 
asked. 
"why, she, of course,' said the dodo, pointing to alice with 
one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her, 
calling out in a confused way, "prizes! prizes!' 
alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand 
in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt 
water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. 
there was exactly one a-piece all round. 
"but she must have a prize herself, you know,' said the mouse. 
"of course,' the dodo replied very gravely. "what else have 
you got in your pocket?' he went on, turning to alice. 
"only a thimble,' said alice sadly. 
"hand it over here,' said the dodo. 
then they all crowded round her once more, while the dodo 
solemnly presented the thimble, saying "we beg your acceptance of 
this elegant thimble'; and, when it had finished this short 
speech, they all cheered. 
alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked 
so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not 
think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, 
looking as solemn as she could. 
the next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise 
and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not 
taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on 
the back. however, it was over at last, and they sat down again 
in a ring, and begged the mouse to tell them something more. 
"you promised to tell me your history, you know,' said alice, 
"and why it is you hate-c and d,' she added in a whisper, half 
afraid that it would be offended again. 
"mine is a long and a sad tale!' said the mouse, turning to 
alice, and sighing. 
"it is a long tail, certainly,' said alice, looking down with 
wonder at the mouse's tail; "but why do you call it sad?' and 
she kept on puzzling about it while the mouse was speaking, so 
that her idea of the tale was something like this:- 
"fury said to a 
mouse, that he 
met in the 
house, 
"let us 
both go to 
law: i will 
prosecute 
you. -come, 
i'll take no 
denial; we 
must have a 
trial: for 
really this 
morning i've 
nothing 
to do." 
said the 
mouse to the 
cur, "such 
a trial, 
dear sir, 
with 
no jury 
or judge, 
would be 
wasting 
our 
breath." 
"i'll be 
judge, i'll 
be jury," 
said 
cunning 
old fury: 
"i'll 
try the 
whole 
cause, 
and 
condemn 
you 
to 
death."' 
"you are not attending!' said the mouse to alice severely. 
"what are you thinking of?' 
"i beg your pardon,' said alice very humbly: "you had got to 
the fifth bend, i think?' 
"i had not!' cried the mouse, sharply and very angrily. 
"a knot!' said alice, always ready to make herself useful, and 
looking anxiously about her. "oh, do let me help to undo it!' 
"i shall do nothing of the sort,' said the mouse, getting up 
and walking away. "you insult me by talking such nonsense!' 
"i didn't mean it!' pleaded poor alice. "but you're so easily 
offended, you know!' 
the mouse only growled in reply. 
"please come back and finish your story!' alice called after 
it; and the others all joined in chorus, "yes, please do!' but 
the mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little 
quicker. 
"what a pity it wouldn't stay!' sighed the lory, as soon as it 
was quite out of sight; and an old crab took the opportunity of 
saying to her daughter "ah, my dear! let this be a lesson to you 
never to lose your temper!' "hold your tongue, ma!' said the 
young crab, a little snappishly. "you're enough to try the 
patience of an oyster!' 
"i wish i had our dinah here, i know i do!' said alice aloud, 
addressing nobody in particular. "she'd soon fetch it back!' 
"and who is dinah, if i might venture to ask the question?' 
said the lory. 
alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about 
her pet: "dinah's our cat. and she's such a capital one for 
catching mice you can't think! and oh, i wish you could see her 
after the birds! why, she'll eat a little bird as soon as look 
at it!' 
this speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. 
some of the birds hurried off at once: one old magpie began 
wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, "i really must be 
getting home; the night-air doesn't suit my throat!' and a canary 
called out in a trembling voice to its children, "come away, my 
dears! it's high time you were all in bed!' on various pretexts 
they all moved off, and alice was soon left alone. 
"i wish i hadn't mentioned dinah!' she said to herself in a 
melancholy tone. "nobody seems to like her, down here, and i'm 
sure she's the best cat in the world! oh, my dear dinah! i 
wonder if i shall ever see you any more!' and here poor alice 
began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and low-spirited. 
in a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of 
footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping 
that the mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to 
finish his story. 
chapter iv 
the rabbit sends in a little bill 
it was the white rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and 
looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; 
and she heard it muttering to itself "the duchess! the duchess! 
oh my dear paws! oh my fur and whiskers! she'll get me 
executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets! where can i have 
dropped them, i wonder?' alice guessed in a moment that it was 
looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she 
very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were 
nowhere to be seen-everything seemed to have changed since her 
swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and 
the little door, had vanished completely. 
very soon the rabbit noticed alice, as she went hunting about, 
and called out to her in an angry tone, "why, mary ann, what are 
you doing out here? run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of 
gloves and a fan! quick, now!' and alice was so much frightened 
that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without 
trying to explain the mistake it had made. 
"he took me for his housemaid,' she said to herself as she ran. 
"how surprised he'll be when he finds out who i am! but i'd 
better take him his fan and gloves-that is, if i can find them.' 
as she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door 
of which was a bright brass plate with the name "w. rabbit' 
engraved upon it. she went in without knocking, and hurried 
upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real mary ann, 
and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and 
gloves. 
"how queer it seems,' alice said to herself, "to be going 
messages for a rabbit! i suppose dinah'll be sending me on 
messages next!' and she began fancying the sort of thing that 
would happen: ""miss alice! come here directly, and get ready 
for your walk!" "coming in a minute, nurse! but i've got to see 
that the mouse doesn't get out." only i don't think,' alice went 
on, "that they'd let dinah stop in the house if it began ordering 
people about like that!' 
by this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with 
a table in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two 
or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and 
a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when 
her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking- 
glass. there was no label this time with the words "drink me,' 
but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips. "i know 
something interesting is sure to happen,' she said to herself, 
"whenever i eat or drink anything; so i'll just see what this 
bottle does. i do hope it'll make me grow large again, for 
really i'm quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!' 
it did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: 
before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing 
against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being 
broken. she hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself 
"that's quite enough-i hope i shan't grow any more-as it is, i 
can't get out at the door-i do wish i hadn't drunk quite so 
much!' 
alas! it was too late to wish that! she went on growing, and 
growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in 
another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried 
the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the 
other arm curled round her head. still she went on growing, and, 
as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one 
foot up the chimney, and said to herself "now i can do no more, 
whatever happens. what will become of me?' 
luckily for alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full 
effect, and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, 
and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting 
out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy. 
"it was much pleasanter at home,' thought poor alice, "when one 
wasn't always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about 
by mice and rabbits. i almost wish i hadn't gone down that 
rabbit-hole-and yet-and yet-it's rather curious, you know, 
this sort of life! i do wonder what can have happened to me! 
when i used to read fairy-tales, i fancied that kind of thing 
never happened, and now here i am in the middle of one! there 
ought to be a book written about me, that there ought! and when 
i grow up, i'll write one-but i'm grown up now,' she added in a 
sorrowful tone; "at least there's no room to grow up any more 
here.' 
"but then,' thought alice, "shall i never get any older than i 
am now? that'll be a comfort, one way-never to be an old woman- 
but then-always to have lessons to learn! oh, i shouldn't like that!' 
"oh, you foolish alice!' she answered herself. "how can you 
learn lessons in here? why, there's hardly room for you, and no 
room at all for any lesson-books!' 
and so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, 
and making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few 
minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen. 
"mary ann! mary ann!' said the voice. "fetch me my gloves 
this moment!' then came a little pattering of feet on the 
stairs. alice knew it was the rabbit coming to look for her, and 
she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she 
was now about a thousand times as large as the rabbit, and had no 
reason to be afraid of it. 
presently the rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; 
but, as the door opened inwards, and alice's elbow was pressed 
hard against it, that attempt proved a failure. alice heard it 
say to itself "then i'll go round and get in at the window.' 
"that you won't' thought alice, and, after waiting till she 
fancied she heard the rabbit just under the window, she suddenly 
spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air. she did not 
get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall, 
and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was 
just possible it had fallen into a cucumber-frame, or something 
of the sort. 
next came an angry voice-the rabbit's-"pat! pat! where are 
you?' and then a voice she had never heard before, "sure then 
i'm here! digging for apples, yer honour!' 
"digging for apples, indeed!' said the rabbit angrily. "here! 
come and help me out of this!' (sounds of more broken glass.) 
"now tell me, pat, what's that in the window?' 
"sure, it's an arm, yer honour!' (he pronounced it "arrum.') 
"an arm, you goose! who ever saw one that size? why, it 
fills the whole window!' 
"sure, it does, yer honour: but it's an arm for all that.' 
"well, it's got no business there, at any rate: go and take it 
away!' 
there was a long silence after this, and alice could only hear 
whispers now and then; such as, "sure, i don't like it, yer 
honour, at all, at all!' "do as i tell you, you coward!' and at 
last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in 
the air. this time there were two little shrieks, and more 
sounds of broken glass. "what a number of cucumber-frames there 
must be!' thought alice. "i wonder what they'll do next! as for 
pulling me out of the window, i only wish they could! i'm sure i 
don't want to stay in here any longer!' 
she waited for some time without hearing anything more: at 
last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a 
good many voices all talking together: she made out the words: 
"where's the other ladder?-why, i hadn't to bring but one; 
bill's got the other-bill! fetch it here, lad!-here, put 'em up 
at this corner-no, tie 'em together first-they don't reach half 
high enough yet-oh! they'll do well enough; don't be particular- 
here, bill! catch hold of this rope-will the roof bear?-mind 
that loose slate-oh, it's coming down! heads below!' (a loud 
crash)-"now, who did that?-it was bill, i fancy-who's to go 
down the chimney?-nay, i shan't! you do it!-that i won't, 
then!-bill's to go down-here, bill! the master says you're to 
go down the chimney!' 
"oh! so bill's got to come down the chimney, has he?' said 
alice to herself. "shy, they seem to put everything upon bill! 
i wouldn't be in bill's place for a good deal: this fireplace is 
narrow, to be sure; but i think i can kick a little!' 
she drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and 
waited till she heard a little animal (she couldn't guess of what 
sort it was) scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close 
above her: then, saying to herself "this is bill,' she gave one 
sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next. 
the first thing she heard was a general chorus of "there goes 
bill!' then the rabbit's voice along-"catch him, you by the 
hedge!' then silence, and then another confusion of voices-"hold 
up his head-brandy now-don't choke him-how was it, old fellow? 
what happened to you? tell us all about it!' 
last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, ("that's bill,' 
thought alice,) "well, i hardly know-no more, thank ye; i'm 
better now-but i'm a deal too flustered to tell you-all i know 
is, something comes at me like a jack-in-the-box, and up i goes 
like a sky-rocket!' 
"so you did, old fellow!' said the others. 
"we must burn the house down!' said the rabbit's voice; and 
alice called out as loud as she could, "if you do. i'll set 
dinah at you!' 
there was a dead silence instantly, and alice thought to 
herself, "i wonder what they will do next! if they had any 
sense, they'd take the roof off.' after a minute or two, they 
began moving about again, and alice heard the rabbit say, "a 
barrowful will do, to begin with.' 
"a barrowful of what?' thought alice; but she had not long to 
doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came 
rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face. 
"i'll put a stop to this,' she said to herself, and shouted out, 
"you'd better not do that again!' which produced another dead 
silence. 
alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all 
turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright 
idea came into her head. "if i eat one of these cakes,' she 
thought, "it's sure to make some change in my size; and as it 
can't possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, i 
suppose.' 
so she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find 
that she began shrinking directly. as soon as she was small 
enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and 
found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside. 
the poor little lizard, bill, was in the middle, being held up by 
two guinea-pigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle. 
they all made a rush at alice the moment she appeared; but she 
ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a 
thick wood. 
"the first thing i've got to do,' said alice to herself, as she 
wandered about in the wood, "is to grow to my right size again; 
and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. 
i think that will be the best plan.' 
it sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and 
simply arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the 
smallest idea how to set about it; and while she was peering 
about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over 
her head made her look up in a great hurry. 
an enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round 
eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. 
"poor little thing!' said alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried 
hard to whistle to it; but she was terribly frightened all the 
time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it 
would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing. 
hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of 
stick, and held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped 
into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, 
and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it; then alice 
dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run 
over; and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy 
made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in 
its hurry to get hold of it; then alice, thinking it was very 
like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every 
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle 
again; then the puppy began a series of short charges at the 
stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long 
way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat 
down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its 
mouth, and its great eyes half shut. 
this seemed to alice a good opportunity for making her escape; 
so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out 
of breath, and till the puppy's bark sounded quite faint in the 
distance. 
"and yet what a dear little puppy it was!' said alice, as she 
leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself 
with one of the leaves: "i should have liked teaching it tricks 
very much, if-if i'd only been the right size to do it! oh 
dear! i'd nearly forgotten that i've got to grow up again! let 
me see-how is it to be managed? i suppose i ought to eat or 
drink something or other; but the great question is, what?' 
the great question certainly was, what? alice looked all round 
her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see 
anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under 
the circumstances. there was a large mushroom growing near her, 
about the same height as herself; and when she had looked under 
it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her 
that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it. 
she stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of 
the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large 
caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, 
quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice 
of her or of anything else. 
chapter v 
advice from a caterpillar 
the caterpillar and alice looked at each other for some time in 
silence: at last the caterpillar took the hookah out of its 
mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice. 
"who are you?' said the caterpillar. 
this was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. alice 
replied, rather shyly, "i-i hardly know, sir, just at present- 
at least i know who i was when i got up this morning, but i think 
i must have been changed several times since then.' 
"what do you mean by that?' said the caterpillar sternly. 
"explain yourself!' 
"i can't explain myself, i'm afraid, sir' said alice, "because 
i'm not myself, you see.' 
"i don't see,' said the caterpillar. 
"i'm afraid i can't put it more clearly,' alice replied very 
politely, "for i can't understand it myself to begin with; and 
being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.' 
"it isn't,' said the caterpillar. 
"well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet,' said alice; "but 
when you have to turn into a chrysalis-you will some day, you 
know-and then after that into a butterfly, i should think you'll 
feel it a little queer, won't you?' 
"not a bit,' said the caterpillar. 
"well, perhaps your feelings may be different,' said alice; 
"all i know is, it would feel very queer to me.' 
"you!' said the caterpillar contemptuously. "who are you?' 
which brought them back again to the beginning of the 
conversation. alice felt a little irritated at the caterpillar's 
making such very short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, 
very gravely, "i think, you ought to tell me who you are, first.' 
"why?' said the caterpillar. 
here was another puzzling question; and as alice could not 
think of any good reason, and as the caterpillar seemed to be in 
a very unpleasant state of mind, she turned away. 
"come back!' the caterpillar called after her. "i've something 
important to say!' 
this sounded promising, certainly: alice turned and came back 
again. 
"keep your temper,' said the caterpillar. 
"is that all?' said alice, swallowing down her anger as well as 
she could. 
"no,' said the caterpillar. 
alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else 
to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth 
hearing. for some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but 
at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth 
again, and said, "so you think you're changed, do you?' 
"i'm afraid i am, sir,' said alice; "i can't remember things as 
i used-and i don't keep the same size for ten minutes together!' 
"can't remember what things?' said the caterpillar. 
"well, i've tried to say "how doth the little busy bee," but it 
all came different!' alice replied in a very melancholy voice. 
"repeat, "you are old, father william,"' said the caterpillar. 
alice folded her hands, and began:- 
"you are old, father william,' the young man said, 
"and your hair has become very white; 
and yet you incessantly stand on your head- 
do you think, at your age, it is right?' 
"in my youth,' father william replied to his son, 
"i feared it might injure the brain; 
but, now that i'm perfectly sure i have none, 
why, i do it again and again.' 
"you are old,' said the youth, "as i mentioned before, 
and have grown most uncommonly fat; 
yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door- 
pray, what is the reason of that?' 
"in my youth,' said the sage, as he shook his grey locks, 
"i kept all my limbs very supple 
by the use of this ointment-one shilling the box- 
allow me to sell you a couple?' 
"you are old,' said the youth, "and your jaws are too weak 
for anything tougher than suet; 
yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak- 
pray how did you manage to do it?' 
"in my youth,' said his father, "i took to the law, 
and argued each case with my wife; 
and the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw, 
has lasted the rest of my life.' 
"you are old,' said the youth, "one would hardly suppose 
that your eye was as steady as ever; 
yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose- 
what made you so awfully clever?' 
"i have answered three questions, and that is enough,' 
said his father; "don't give yourself airs! 
do you think i can listen all day to such stuff? 
be off, or i'll kick you down stairs!' 
"that is not said right,' said the caterpillar. 
"not quite right, i'm afraid,' said alice, timidly; "some of the 
words have got altered.' 
"it is wrong from beginning to end,' said the caterpillar 
decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes. 
the caterpillar was the first to speak. 
"what size do you want to be?' it asked. 
"oh, i'm not particular as to size,' alice hastily replied; 
"only one doesn't like changing so often, you know.' 
"i don't know,' said the caterpillar. 
alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in 
her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper. 
"are you content now?' said the caterpillar. 
"well, i should like to be a little larger, sir, if you 
wouldn't mind,' said alice: "three inches is such a wretched 
height to be.' 
"it is a very good height indeed!' said the caterpillar 
angrily, rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three 
inches high). 
"but i'm not used to it!' pleaded poor alice in a piteous tone. 
and she thought of herself, "i wish the creatures wouldn't be so 
easily offended!' 
"you'll get used to it in time,' said the caterpillar; and it 
put the hookah into its mouth and began smoking again. 
this time alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. 
in a minute or two the caterpillar took the hookah out of its 
mouth and yawned once or twice, and shook itself. then it got 
down off the mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely 
remarking as it went, "one side will make you grow taller, and 
the other side will make you grow shorter.' 
"one side of what? the other side of what?' thought alice to 
herself. 
"of the mushroom,' said the caterpillar, just as if she had 
asked it aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight. 
alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a 
minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as 
it was perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question. 
however, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they 
would go, and broke off a bit of the edge with each hand. 
"and now which is which?' she said to herself, and nibbled a 
little of the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment 
she felt a violent blow underneath her chin: it had struck her 
foot! 
she was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but 
she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking 
rapidly; so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. 
her chin was pressed so closely against her foot, that there was 
hardly room to open her mouth; but she did it at last, and 
managed to swallow a morsel of the lefthand bit. 
"come, my head's free at last!' said alice in a tone of 
delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she 
found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found: all she could 
see, when she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which 
seemed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay 
far below her. 
"what can all that green stuff be?' said alice. "and where 
have my shoulders got to? and oh, my poor hands, how is it i 
can't see you?' she was moving them about as she spoke, but no 
result seemed to follow, except a little shaking among the 
distant green leaves. 
as there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her 
head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted 
to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction, 
like a serpent. she had just succeeded in curving it down into a 
graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which 
she found to be nothing but the tops of the trees under which she 
had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a 
hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating 
her violently with its wings. 
"serpent!' screamed the pigeon. 
"i'm not a serpent!' said alice indignantly. "let me alone!' 
"serpent, i say again!' repeated the pigeon, but in a more 
subdued tone, and added with a kind of sob, "i've tried every 
way, and nothing seems to suit them!' 
"i haven't the least idea what you're talking about,' said 
alice. 
"i've tried the roots of trees, and i've tried banks, and i've 
tried hedges,' the pigeon went on, without attending to her; "but 
those serpents! there's no pleasing them!' 
alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no 
use in saying anything more till the pigeon had finished. 
"as if it wasn't trouble enough hatching the eggs,' said the 
pigeon; "but i must be on the look-out for serpents night and 
day! why, i haven't had a wink of sleep these three weeks!' 
"i'm very sorry you've been annoyed,' said alice, who was 
beginning to see its meaning. 
"and just as i'd taken the highest tree in the wood,' continued 
the pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, "and just as i was 
thinking i should be free of them at last, they must needs come 
wriggling down from the sky! ugh, serpent!' 
"but i'm not a serpent, i tell you!' said alice. "i'm a-i'm 
a-' 
"well! what are you?' said the pigeon. "i can see you're 
trying to invent something!' 
"i-i'm a little girl,' said alice, rather doubtfully, as she 
remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day. 
"a likely story indeed!' said the pigeon in a tone of the 
deepest contempt. "i've seen a good many little girls in my 
time, but never one with such a neck as that! no, no! you're a 
serpent; and there's no use denying it. i suppose you'll be 
telling me next that you never tasted an egg!' 
"i have tasted eggs, certainly,' said alice, who was a very 
truthful child; "but little girls eat eggs quite as much as 
serpents do, you know.' 
"i don't believe it,' said the pigeon; "but if they do, why 
then they're a kind of serpent, that's all i can say.' 
this was such a new idea to alice, that she was quite silent 
for a minute or two, which gave the pigeon the opportunity of 
adding, "you're looking for eggs, i know that well enough; and 
what does it matter to me whether you're a little girl or a 
serpent?' 
"it matters a good deal to me,' said alice hastily; "but i'm 
not looking for eggs, as it happens; and if i was, i shouldn't 
want yours: i don't like them raw.' 
"well, be off, then!' said the pigeon in a sulky tone, as it 
settled down again into its nest. alice crouched down among the 
trees as well as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled 
among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and 
untwist it. after a while she remembered that she still held the 
pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set to work very 
carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the other, and 
growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had 
succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height. 
it was so long since she had been anything near the right size, 
that it felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a 
few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual. "come, 
there's half my plan done now! how puzzling all these changes 
are! i'm never sure what i'm going to be, from one minute to 
another! however, i've got back to my right size: the next 
thing is, to get into that beautiful garden-how is that to be 
done, i wonder?' as she said this, she came suddenly upon an 
open place, with a little house in it about four feet high. 
"whoever lives there,' thought alice, "it'll never do to come 
upon them this size: why, i should frighten them out of their 
wits!' so she began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did 
not venture to go near the house till she had brought herself 
down to nine inches high. 
chapter vi 
pig and pepper 
for a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and 
wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came 
running out of the wood-(she considered him to be a footman 
because he was in livery: otherwise, judging by his face only, 
she would have called him a fish)-and rapped loudly at the door 
with his knuckles. it was opened by another footman in livery, 
with a round face, and large eyes like a frog; and both footmen, 
alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all over their 
heads. she felt very curious to know what it was all about, and 
crept a little way out of the wood to listen. 
the fish-footman began by producing from under his arm a great 
letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to 
the other, saying, in a solemn tone, "for the duchess. an 
invitation from the queen to play croquet.' the frog-footman 
repeated, in the same solemn tone, only changing the order of the 
words a little, "from the queen. an invitation for the duchess 
to play croquet.' 
then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled 
together. 
alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into 
the wood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped 
out the fish-footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the 
ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky. 
alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked. 
"there's no sort of use in knocking,' said the footman, "and 
that for two reasons. first, because i'm on the same side of the 
door as you are; secondly, because they're making such a noise 
inside, no one could possibly hear you.' and certainly there was 
a most extraordinary noise going on within-a constant howling 
and sneezing, and every now and then a great crash, as if a dish 
or kettle had been broken to pieces. 
"please, then,' said alice, "how am i to get in?' 
"there might be some sense in your knocking,' the footman went 
on without attending to her, "if we had the door between us. for 
instance, if you were inside, you might knock, and i could let 
you out, you know.' he was looking up into the sky all the time 
he was speaking, and this alice thought decidedly uncivil. "but 
perhaps he can't help it,' she said to herself; "his eyes are so 
very nearly at the top of his head. but at any rate he might 
answer questions.-how am i to get in?' she repeated, aloud. 
"i shall sit here,' the footman remarked, "till tomorrow-' 
at this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate 
came skimming out, straight at the footman's head: it just 
grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trees 
behind him. 
"-or next day, maybe,' the footman continued in the same tone, 
exactly as if nothing had happened. 
"how am i to get in?' asked alice again, in a louder tone. 
"are you to get in at all?' said the footman. "that's the 
first question, you know.' 
it was, no doubt: only alice did not like to be told so. 
"it's really dreadful,' she muttered to herself, "the way all the 
creatures argue. it's enough to drive one crazy!' 
the footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for 
repeating his remark, with variations. "i shall sit here,' he 
said, "on and off, for days and days.' 
"but what am i to do?' said alice. 
"anything you like,' said the footman, and began whistling. 
"oh, there's no use in talking to him,' said alice desperately: 
"he's perfectly idiotic!' and she opened the door and went in. 
the door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of 
smoke from one end to the other: the duchess was sitting on a 
three-legged stool in the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was 
leaning over the fire, stirring a large cauldron which seemed to 
be full of soup. 
"there's certainly too much pepper in that soup!' alice said to 
herself, as well as she could for sneezing. 
there was certainly too much of it in the air. even the 
duchess sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was 
sneezing and howling alternately without a moment's pause. the 
only things in the kitchen that did not sneeze, were the cook, 
and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and grinning from 
ear to ear. 
"please would you tell me,' said alice, a little timidly, for 
she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to 
speak first, "why your cat grins like that?' 
"it's a cheshire cat,' said the duchess, "and that's why. pig!' 
she said the last word with such sudden violence that alice 
quite jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed 
to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on 
again:- 
"i didn't know that cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, i 
didn't know that cats could grin.' 
"they all can,' said the duchess; "and most of 'em do.' 
"i don't know of any that do,' alice said very politely, 
feeling quite pleased to have got into a conversation. 
"you don't know much,' said the duchess; "and that's a fact.' 
alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought 
it would be as well to introduce some other subject of 
conversation. while she was trying to fix on one, the cook took 
the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work 
throwing everything within her reach at the duchess and the baby 
the fire-irons came first; then followed a shower of saucepans, 
plates, and dishes. the duchess took no notice of them even when 
they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already, that it 
was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not. 
"oh, please mind what you're doing!' cried alice, jumping up 
and down in an agony of terror. "oh, there goes his precious 
nose'; as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very 
nearly carried it off. 
"if everybody minded their own business,' the duchess said in a 
hoarse growl, "the world would go round a deal faster than it 
does.' 
"which would not be an advantage,' said alice, who felt very 
glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her 
knowledge. "just think of what work it would make with the day 
and night! you see the earth takes twenty-four hours to turn 
round on its axis-' 
"talking of axes,' said the duchess, "chop off her head!' 
alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant 
to take the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and 
seemed not to be listening, so she went on again: "twenty-four 
hours, i think; or is it twelve? i-' 
"oh, don't bother me,' said the duchess; "i never could abide 
figures!' and with that she began nursing her child again, 
singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a 
violent shake at the end of every line: 
"speak roughly to your little boy, 
and beat him when he sneezes: 
he only does it to annoy, 
because he knows it teases.' 
chorus. 
(in which the cook and the baby joined):- 
"wow! wow! wow!' 
while the duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept 
tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing 
howled so, that alice could hardly hear the words:- 
"i speak severely to my boy, 
i beat him when he sneezes; 
for he can thoroughly enjoy 
the pepper when he pleases!' 
chorus. 
"wow! wow! wow!' 
"here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!' the duchess said 
to alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke. "i must go and 
get ready to play croquet with the queen,' and she hurried out of 
the room. the cook threw a frying-pan after her as she went out, 
but it just missed her. 
alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer- 
shaped little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all 
directions, "just like a star-fish,' thought alice. the poor 
little thing was snorting like a steam-engine when she caught it, 
and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again, 
so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much 
as she could do to hold it. 
as soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, 
(which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep 
tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its 
undoing itself,) she carried it out into the open air. "if i 
don't take this child away with me,' thought alice, "they're sure 
to kill it in a day or two: wouldn't it be murder to leave it 
behind?' she said the last words out loud, and the little thing 
grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time). "don't 
grunt,' said alice; "that's not at all a proper way of expressing 
yourself.' 
the baby grunted again, and alice looked very anxiously into 
its face to see what was the matter with it. there could be no 
doubt that it had a very turn-up nose, much more like a snout 
than a real nose; also its eyes were getting extremely small for 
a baby: altogether alice did not like the look of the thing at 
all. "but perhaps it was only sobbing,' she thought, and looked 
into its eyes again, to see if there were any tears. 
no, there were no tears. "if you're going to turn into a pig, 
my dear,' said alice, seriously, "i'll have nothing more to do 
with you. mind now!' the poor little thing sobbed again (or 
grunted, it was impossible to say which), and they went on for 
some while in silence. 
alice was just beginning to think to herself, "now, what am i 
to do with this creature when i get it home?' when it grunted 
again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some 
alarm. this time there could be no mistake about it: it was 
neither more nor less than a pig, and she felt that it would be 
quite absurd for her to carry it further. 
so she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to 
see it trot away quietly into the wood. "if it had grown up,' 
she said to herself, "it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: 
but it makes rather a handsome pig, i think.' and she began 
thinking over other children she knew, who might do very well as 
pigs, and was just saying to herself, "if one only knew the right 
way to change them-' when she was a little startled by seeing 
the cheshire cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards off. 
the cat only grinned when it saw alice. it looked good- 
natured, she thought: still it had very long claws and a great 
many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect. 
"cheshire puss,' she began, rather timidly, as she did not at 
all know whether it would like the name: however, it only 
grinned a little wider. "come, it's pleased so far,' thought 
alice, and she went on. "would you tell me, please, which way i 
ought to go from here?' 
"that depends a good deal on where you want to get to,' said 
the cat. 
"i don't much care where-' said alice. 
"then it doesn't matter which way you go,' said the cat. 
"-so long as i get somewhere,' alice added as an explanation. 
"oh, you're sure to do that,' said the cat, "if you only walk 
long enough.' 
alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another 
question. "what sort of people live about here?' 
"in that direction,' the cat said, waving its right paw round, 
"lives a hatter: and in that direction,' waving the other paw, 
"lives a march hare. visit either you like: they're both mad.' 
"but i don't want to go among mad people,' alice remarked. 
"oh, you can't help that,' said the cat: "we're all mad here. 
i'm mad. you're mad.' 
"how do you know i'm mad?' said alice. 
"you must be,' said the cat, "or you wouldn't have come here.' 
alice didn't think that proved it at all; however, she went on 
"and how do you know that you're mad?' 
"to begin with,' said the cat, "a dog's not mad. you grant 
that?' 
"i suppose so,' said alice. 
"well, then,' the cat went on, "you see, a dog growls when it's 
angry, and wags its tail when it's pleased. now i growl when i'm 
pleased, and wag my tail when i'm angry. therefore i'm mad.' 
"i call it purring, not growling,' said alice. 
"call it what you like,' said the cat. "do you play croquet 
with the queen to-day?' 
"i should like it very much,' said alice, "but i haven't been 
invited yet.' 
"you'll see me there,' said the cat, and vanished. 
alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used 
to queer things happening. while she was looking at the place 
where it had been, it suddenly appeared again. 
"by-the-bye, what became of the baby?' said the cat. "i'd 
nearly forgotten to ask.' 
"it turned into a pig,' alice quietly said, just as if it had 
come back in a natural way. 
"i thought it would,' said the cat, and vanished again. 
alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it 
did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the 
direction in which the march hare was said to live. "i've seen 
hatters before,' she said to herself; "the march hare will be 
much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is may it won't be 
raving mad-at least not so mad as it was in march.' as she said 
this, she looked up, and there was the cat again, sitting on a 
branch of a tree. 
"did you say pig, or fig?' said the cat. 
"i said pig,' replied alice; "and i wish you wouldn't keep 
appearing and vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.' 
"all right,' said the cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly, 
beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, 
which remained some time after the rest of it had gone. 
"well! i've often seen a cat without a grin,' thought alice; 
"but a grin without a cat! it's the most curious thing i ever 
saw in my life!' 
she had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the 
house of the march hare: she thought it must be the right house, 
because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was 
thatched with fur. it was so large a house, that she did not 
like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand 
bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high: even 
then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself 
"suppose it should be raving mad after all! i almost wish i'd 
gone to see the hatter instead!' 
chapter vii 
a mad tea-party 
there was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, 
and the march hare and the hatter were having tea at it: a 
dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two 
were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking 
over its head. "very uncomfortable for the dormouse,' thought alice; 
"only, as it's asleep, i suppose it doesn't mind.' 
the table was a large one, but the three were all crowded 
together at one corner of it: "no room! no room!' they cried 
out when they saw alice coming. "there's plenty of room!' said 
alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large arm-chair at one 
end of the table. 
"have some wine,' the march hare said in an encouraging tone. 
alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it 
but tea. "i don't see any wine,' she remarked. 
"there isn't any,' said the march hare. 
"then it wasn't very civil of you to offer it,' said alice 
angrily. 
"it wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being 
invited,' said the march hare. 
"i didn't know it was your table,' said alice; "it's laid for a 
great many more than three.' 
"your hair wants cutting,' said the hatter. he had been 
looking at alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was 
his first speech. 
"you should learn not to make personal remarks,' alice said 
with some severity; "it's very rude.' 
the hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all 
he said was, "why is a raven like a writing-desk?' 
"come, we shall have some fun now!' thought alice. "i'm glad 
they've begun asking riddles.-i believe i can guess that,' she 
added aloud. 
"do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?' 
said the march hare. 
"exactly so,' said alice. 
"then you should say what you mean,' the march hare went on. 
"i do,' alice hastily replied; "at least-at least i mean what 
i say-that's the same thing, you know.' 
"not the same thing a bit!' said the hatter. "you might just 
as well say that "i see what i eat" is the same thing as "i eat 
what i see"!' 
"you might just as well say,' added the march hare, "that "i 
like what i get" is the same thing as "i get what i like"!' 
"you might just as well say,' added the dormouse, who seemed to 
be talking in his sleep, "that "i breathe when i sleep" is the 
same thing as "i sleep when i breathe"!' 
"it is the same thing with you,' said the hatter, and here the 
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, 
while alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and 
writing-desks, which wasn't much. 
the hatter was the first to break the silence. "what day of 
the month is it?' he said, turning to alice: he had taken his 
watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking 
it every now and then, and holding it to his ear. 
alice considered a little, and then said "the fourth.' 
"two days wrong!' sighed the hatter. "i told you butter 
wouldn't suit the works!' he added looking angrily at the march 
hare. 
"it was the best butter,' the march hare meekly replied. 
"yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,' the hatter 
grumbled: "you shouldn't have put it in with the bread-knife.' 
the march hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then 
he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he 
could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, "it 
was the best butter, you know.' 
alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. 
"what a funny watch!' she remarked. "it tells the day of the 
month, and doesn't tell what o'clock it is!' 
"why should it?' muttered the hatter. "does your watch tell 
you what year it is?' 
"of course not,' alice replied very readily: "but that's 
because it stays the same year for such a long time together.' 
"which is just the case with mine,' said the hatter. 
alice felt dreadfully puzzled. the hatter's remark seemed to 
have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly english. 
"i don't quite understand you,' she said, as politely as she 
could. 
"the dormouse is asleep again,' said the hatter, and he poured 
a little hot tea upon its nose. 
the dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without 
opening its eyes, "of course, of course; just what i was going to 
remark myself.' 
"have you guessed the riddle yet?' the hatter said, turning to 
alice again. 
"no, i give it up,' alice replied: "what's the answer?' 
"i haven't the slightest idea,' said the hatter. 
"nor i,' said the march hare. 
alice sighed wearily. "i think you might do something better 
with the time,' she said, "than waste it in asking riddles that 
have no answers.' 
"if you knew time as well as i do,' said the hatter, "you 
wouldn't talk about wasting it. it's him.' 
"i don't know what you mean,' said alice. 
"of course you don't!' the hatter said, tossing his head 
contemptuously. "i dare say you never even spoke to time!' 
"perhaps not,' alice cautiously replied: "but i know i have to 
beat time when i learn music.' 
"ah! that accounts for it,' said the hatter. "he won't stand 
beating. now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he'd do 
almost anything you liked with the clock. for instance, suppose 
it were nine o'clock in the morning, just time to begin lessons: 
you'd only have to whisper a hint to time, and round goes the 
clock in a twinkling! half-past one, time for dinner!' 
("i only wish it was,' the march hare said to itself in a 
whisper.) 
"that would be grand, certainly,' said alice thoughtfully: 
"but then-i shouldn't be hungry for it, you know.' 
"not at first, perhaps,' said the hatter: "but you could keep 
it to half-past one as long as you liked.' 
"is that the way you manage?' alice asked. 
the hatter shook his head mournfully. "not i!' he replied. 
"we quarrelled last march-just before he went mad, you know-' 
(pointing with his tea spoon at the march hare,) "-it was at the 
great concert given by the queen of hearts, and i had to sing 
"twinkle, twinkle, little bat! 
how i wonder what you're at!" 
you know the song, perhaps?' 
"i've heard something like it,' said alice. 
"it goes on, you know,' the hatter continued, "in this way:- 
"up above the world you fly, 
like a tea-tray in the sky. 
twinkle, twinkle-"' 
here the dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep 
"twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle-' and went on so long that 
they had to pinch it to make it stop. 
"well, i'd hardly finished the first verse,' said the hatter, 
"when the queen jumped up and bawled out, "he's murdering the 
time! off with his head!"' 
"how dreadfully savage!' exclaimed alice. 
"and ever since that,' the hatter went on in a mournful tone, 
"he won't do a thing i ask! it's always six o'clock now.' 
a bright idea came into alice's head. "is that the reason so 
many tea-things are put out here?' she asked. 
"yes, that's it,' said the hatter with a sigh: "it's always 
tea-time, and we've no time to wash the things between whiles.' 
"then you keep moving round, i suppose?' said alice. 
"exactly so,' said the hatter: "as the things get used up.' 
"but what happens when you come to the beginning again?' alice 
ventured to ask. 
"suppose we change the subject,' the march hare interrupted, 
yawning. "i'm getting tired of this. i vote the young lady 
tells us a story.' 
"i'm afraid i don't know one,' said alice, rather alarmed at 
the proposal. 
"then the dormouse shall!' they both cried. "wake up, 
dormouse!' and they pinched it on both sides at once. 
the dormouse slowly opened his eyes. "i wasn't asleep,' he 
said in a hoarse, feeble voice: "i heard every word you fellows 
were saying.' 
"tell us a story!' said the march hare. 
"yes, please do!' pleaded alice. 
"and be quick about it,' added the hatter, "or you'll be asleep 
again before it's done.' 
"once upon a time there were three little sisters,' the 
dormouse began in a great hurry; "and their names were elsie, 
lacie, and tillie; and they lived at the bottom of a well-' 
"what did they live on?' said alice, who always took a great 
interest in questions of eating and drinking. 
"they lived on treacle,' said the dormouse, after thinking a 
minute or two. 
"they couldn't have done that, you know,' alice gently 
remarked; "they'd have been ill.' 
"so they were,' said the dormouse; "very ill.' 
alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways 
of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went 
on: "but why did they live at the bottom of a well?' 
"take some more tea,' the march hare said to alice, very 
earnestly. 
"i've had nothing yet,' alice replied in an offended tone, "so 
i can't take more.' 
"you mean you can't take less,' said the hatter: "it's very 
easy to take more than nothing.' 
"nobody asked your opinion,' said alice. 
"who's making personal remarks now?' the hatter asked 
triumphantly. 
alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped 
herself to some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the 
dormouse, and repeated her question. "why did they live at the 
bottom of a well?' 
the dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and 
then said, "it was a treacle-well.' 
"there's no such thing!' alice was beginning very angrily, but 
the hatter and the march hare went "sh! sh!' and the dormouse 
sulkily remarked, "if you can't be civil, you'd better finish the 
story for yourself.' 
"no, please go on!' alice said very humbly; "i won't interrupt 
again. i dare say there may be one.' 
"one, indeed!' said the dormouse indignantly. however, he 
consented to go on. "and so these three little sisters-they 
were learning to draw, you know-' 
"what did they draw?' said alice, quite forgetting her promise. 
"treacle,' said the dormouse, without considering at all this 
time. 
"i want a clean cup,' interrupted the hatter: "let's all move 
one place on.' 
he moved on as he spoke, and the dormouse followed him: the 
march hare moved into the dormouse's place, and alice rather 
unwillingly took the place of the march hare. the hatter was the 
only one who got any advantage from the change: and alice was a 
good deal worse off than before, as the march hare had just upset 
the milk-jug into his plate. 
alice did not wish to offend the dormouse again, so she began 
very cautiously: "but i don't understand. where did they draw 
the treacle from?' 
"you can draw water out of a water-well,' said the hatter; "so 
i should think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well-eh, 
stupid?' 
"but they were in the well,' alice said to the dormouse, not 
choosing to notice this last remark. 
"of course they were', said the dormouse; "-well in.' 
this answer so confused poor alice, that she let the dormouse 
go on for some time without interrupting it. 
"they were learning to draw,' the dormouse went on, yawning and 
rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; "and they drew 
all manner of things-everything that begins with an m-' 
"why with an m?' said alice. 
"why not?' said the march hare. 
alice was silent. 
the dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going 
off into a doze; but, on being pinched by the hatter, it woke up 
again with a little shriek, and went on: "-that begins with an 
m, such as mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness- 
you know you say things are "much of a muchness"-did you ever 
see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?' 
"really, now you ask me,' said alice, very much confused, "i 
don't think-' 
"then you shouldn't talk,' said the hatter. 
this piece of rudeness was more than alice could bear: she got 
up in great disgust, and walked off; the dormouse fell asleep 
instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her 
going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that 
they would call after her: the last time she saw them, they were 
trying to put the dormouse into the teapot. 
"at any rate i'll never go there again!' said alice as she 
picked her way through the wood. "it's the stupidest tea-party i 
ever was at in all my life!' 
just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a 
door leading right into it. "that's very curious!' she thought. 
"but everything's curious today. i think i may as well go in at once.' 
and in she went. 
once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the 
little glass table. "now, i'll manage better this time,' 
she said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, 
and unlocking the door that led into the garden. then she went 
to work nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece of it 
in her pocket) till she was about a foot high: then she walked down 
the little passage: and then-she found herself at last in the 
beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool fountains. 
chapter viii 
the queen's croquet-ground 
a large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the 
roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at 
it, busily painting them red. alice thought this a very curious 
thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up 
to them she heard one of them say, "look out now, five! don't go 
splashing paint over me like that!' 
"i couldn't help it,' said five, in a sulky tone; "seven jogged 
my elbow.' 
on which seven looked up and said, "that's right, five! always 
lay the blame on others!' 
"you'd better not talk!' said five. "i heard the queen say only 
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!' 
"what for?' said the one who had spoken first. 
"that's none of your business, two!' said seven. 
"yes, it is his business!' said five, "and i'll tell him-it 
was for bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.' 
seven flung down his brush, and had just begun "well, of all 
the unjust things-' when his eye chanced to fall upon alice, as 
she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly: the 
others looked round also, and all of them bowed low. 
"would you tell me,' said alice, a little timidly, "why you are 
painting those roses?' 
five and seven said nothing, but looked at two. two began in a 
low voice, "why the fact is, you see, miss, this here ought to 
have been a red rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; 
and if the queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads 
cut off, you know. so you see, miss, we're doing our best, afore 
she comes, to-' at this moment five, who had been anxiously 
looking across the garden, called out "the queen! the queen!' 
and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon 
their faces. there was a sound of many footsteps, and alice 
looked round, eager to see the queen. 
first came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped 
like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and 
feet at the corners: next the ten courtiers; these were 
ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the 
soldiers did. after these came the royal children; there were 
ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand 
in hand, in couples: they were all ornamented with hearts. next 
came the guests, mostly kings and queens, and among them alice 
recognised the white rabbit: it was talking in a hurried nervous 
manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without 
noticing her. then followed the knave of hearts, carrying the 
king's crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this 
grand procession, came the king and queen of hearts. 
alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on 
her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember 
ever having heard of such a rule at processions; "and besides, 
what would be the use of a procession,' thought she, "if people 
had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldn't see it?' 
so she stood still where she was, and waited. 
when the procession came opposite to alice, they all stopped 
and looked at her, and the queen said severely "who is this?' 
she said it to the knave of hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply. 
"idiot!' said the queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, 
turning to alice, she went on, "what's your name, child?' 
"my name is alice, so please your majesty,' said alice very 
politely; but she added, to herself, "why, they're only a pack of 
cards, after all. i needn't be afraid of them!' 
"and who are these?' said the queen, pointing to the three 
gardeners who were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as 
they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs 
was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether 
they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her 
own children. 
"how should i know?' said alice, surprised at her own courage. 
"it's no business of mine.' 
the queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her 
for a moment like a wild beast, screamed "off with her head! 
off-' 
"nonsense!' said alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the 
queen was silent. 
the king laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said 
"consider, my dear: she is only a child!' 
the queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the knave 
"turn them over!' 
the knave did so, very carefully, with one foot. 
"get up!' said the queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the 
three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the 
king, the queen, the royal children, and everybody else. 
"leave off that!' screamed the queen. "you make me giddy.' 
and then, turning to the rose-tree, she went on, "what have you 
been doing here?' 
"may it please your majesty,' said two, in a very humble tone, 
going down on one knee as he spoke, "we were trying-' 
"i see!' said the queen, who had meanwhile been examining the 
roses. "off with their heads!' and the procession moved on, 
three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate 
gardeners, who ran to alice for protection. 
"you shan't be beheaded!' said alice, and she put them into a 
large flower-pot that stood near. the three soldiers wandered 
about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly 
marched off after the others. 
"are their heads off?' shouted the queen. 
"their heads are gone, if it please your majesty!' the soldiers 
shouted in reply. 
"that's right!' shouted the queen. "can you play croquet?' 
the soldiers were silent, and looked at alice, as the question 
was evidently meant for her. 
"yes!' shouted alice. 
"come on, then!' roared the queen, and alice joined the 
procession, wondering very much what would happen next. 
"it's-it's a very fine day!' said a timid voice at her side. 
she was walking by the white rabbit, who was peeping anxiously 
into her face. 
"very,' said alice: "-where's the duchess?' 
"hush! hush!' said the rabbit in a low, hurried tone. he 
looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised 
himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and 
whispered "she's under sentence of execution.' 
"what for?' said alice. 
"did you say "what a pity!"?' the rabbit asked. 
"no, i didn't,' said alice: "i don't think it's at all a pity. 
i said "what for?"' 
"she boxed the queen's ears-' the rabbit began. alice gave a 
little scream of laughter. "oh, hush!' the rabbit whispered in a 
frightened tone. "the queen will hear you! you see, she came 
rather late, and the queen said-' 
"get to your places!' shouted the queen in a voice of thunder, 
and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up 
against each other; however, they got settled down in a minute or 
two, and the game began. alice thought she had never seen such a 
curious croquet-ground in her life; it was all ridges and 
furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live 
flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to 
stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches. 
the chief difficulty alice found at first was in managing her 
flamingo: she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, 
comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down, 
but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened 
out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it 
would twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a 
puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing: 
and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again, 
it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled 
itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, 
there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she 
wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers 
were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the 
ground, alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very 
difficult game indeed. 
the players all played at once without waiting for turns, 
quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in 
a very short time the queen was in a furious passion, and went 
stamping about, and shouting "off with his head!' or "off with 
her head!' about once in a minute. 
alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as 
yet had any dispute with the queen, but she knew that it might 
happen any minute, "and then,' thought she, "what would become of 
me? they're dreadfully fond of beheading people here; the great 
wonder is, that there's any one left alive!' 
she was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering 
whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a 
curious appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at 
first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to 
be a grin, and she said to herself "it's the cheshire cat: now i 
shall have somebody to talk to.' 
"how are you getting on?' said the cat, as soon as there was 
mouth enough for it to speak with. 
alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. "it's no 
use speaking to it,' she thought, "till its ears have come, or at 
least one of them.' in another minute the whole head appeared, 
and then alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the 
game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her. the 
cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and 
no more of it appeared. 
"i don't think they play at all fairly,' alice began, in rather 
a complaining tone, "and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can't 
hear oneself speak-and they don't seem to have any rules in 
particular; at least, if there are, nobody attends to them-and 
you've no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive; 
for instance, there's the arch i've got to go through next 
walking about at the other end of the ground-and i should have 
croqueted the queen's hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it 
saw mine coming!' 
"how do you like the queen?' said the cat in a low voice. 
"not at all,' said alice: "she's so extremely-' just then 
she noticed that the queen was close behind her, listening: so 
she went on, "-likely to win, that it's hardly worth while 
finishing the game.' 
the queen smiled and passed on. 
"who are you talking to?' said the king, going up to alice, and 
looking at the cat's head with great curiosity. 
"it's a friend of mine-a cheshire cat,' said alice: "allow me 
to introduce it.' 
"i don't like the look of it at all,' said the king: 
"however, it may kiss my hand if it likes.' 
"i'd rather not,' the cat remarked. 
"don't be impertinent,' said the king, "and don't look at me 
like that!' he got behind alice as he spoke. 
"a cat may look at a king,' said alice. "i've read that in 
some book, but i don't remember where.' 
"well, it must be removed,' said the king very decidedly, and 
he called the queen, who was passing at the moment, "my dear! i 
wish you would have this cat removed!' 
the queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great 
or small. "off with his head!' she said, without even looking 
round. 
"i'll fetch the executioner myself,' said the king eagerly, and 
he hurried off. 
alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game 
was going on, as she heard the queen's voice in the distance, 
screaming with passion. she had already heard her sentence three 
of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and 
she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in 
such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or 
not. so she went in search of her hedgehog. 
the hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, 
which seemed to alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one 
of them with the other: the only difficulty was, that her 
flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where 
alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up 
into a tree. 
by the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, 
the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: 
"but it doesn't matter much,' thought alice, "as all the arches 
are gone from this side of the ground.' so she tucked it away 
under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for 
a little more conversation with her friend. 
when she got back to the cheshire cat, she was surprised to 
find quite a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute 
going on between the executioner, the king, and the queen, who 
were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent, 
and looked very uncomfortable. 
the moment alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to 
settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, 
though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed 
to make out exactly what they said. 
the executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut off a 
head unless there was a body to cut it off from: that he had 
never had to do such a thing before, and he wasn't going to begin 
at his time of life. 
the king's argument was, that anything that had a head could be 
beheaded, and that you weren't to talk nonsense. 
the queen's argument was, that if something wasn't done about 
it in less than no time she'd have everybody executed, all round. 
(it was this last remark that had made the whole party look so 
grave and anxious.) 
alice could think of nothing else to say but "it belongs to the 
duchess: you'd better ask her about it.' 
"she's in prison,' the queen said to the executioner: "fetch 
her here.' and the executioner went off like an arrow. 
the cat's head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, 
by the time he had come back with the dutchess, it had entirely 
disappeared; so the king and the executioner ran wildly up and down 
looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game. 
chapter ix 
the mock turtle's story 
"you can't think how glad i am to see you again, you dear old 
thing!' said the duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately 
into alice's, and they walked off together. 
alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and 
thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had 
made her so savage when they met in the kitchen. 
"when i'm a duchess,' she said to herself, (not in a very 
hopeful tone though), "i won't have any pepper in my kitchen at 
all. soup does very well without-maybe it's always pepper that 
makes people hot-tempered,' she went on, very much pleased at 
having found out a new kind of rule, "and vinegar that makes them 
sour-and camomile that makes them bitter-and-and barley-sugar 
and such things that make children sweet-tempered. i only wish 
people knew that: then they wouldn't be so stingy about it, you 
know-' 
she had quite forgotten the duchess by this time, and was a 
little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. 
"you're thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you 
forget to talk. i can't tell you just now what the moral of that 
is, but i shall remember it in a bit.' 
"perhaps it hasn't one,' alice ventured to remark. 
"tut, tut, child!' said the duchess. "everything's got a 
moral, if only you can find it.' and she squeezed herself up 
closer to alice's side as she spoke. 
alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, 
because the duchess was very ugly; and secondly, because she was 
exactly the right height to rest her chin upon alice's shoulder, 
and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin. however, she did not 
like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could. 
"the game's going on rather better now,' she said, by way of 
keeping up the conversation a little. 
"'tis so,' said the duchess: "and the moral of that is-"oh, 
'tis love, 'tis love, that makes the world go round!"' 
"somebody said,' alice whispered, "that it's done by everybody 
minding their own business!' 
"ah, well! it means much the same thing,' said the duchess, 
digging her sharp little chin into alice's shoulder as she added, 
"and the moral of that is-"take care of the sense, and the 
sounds will take care of themselves."' 
"how fond she is of finding morals in things!' alice thought to 
herself. 
"i dare say you're wondering why i don't put my arm round your 
waist,' the duchess said after a pause: "the reason is, that i'm 
doubtful about the temper of your flamingo. shall i try the 
experiment?' 
"he might bite,' alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all 
anxious to have the experiment tried. 
"very true,' said the duchess: "flamingoes and mustard both 
bite. and the moral of that is-"birds of a feather flock 
together."' 
"only mustard isn't a bird,' alice remarked. 
"right, as usual,' said the duchess: "what a clear way you 
have of putting things!' 
"it's a mineral, i think,' said alice. 
"of course it is,' said the duchess, who seemed ready to agree 
to everything that alice said; "there's a large mustard-mine near 
here. and the moral of that is-"the more there is of mine, the 
less there is of yours."' 
"oh, i know!' exclaimed alice, who had not attended to this 
last remark, "it's a vegetable. it doesn't look like one, but it 
is.' 
"i quite agree with you,' said the duchess; "and the moral of 
that is-"be what you would seem to be"-or if you'd like it put 
more simply-"never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than 
what it might appear to others that what you were or might have 
been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared 
to them to be otherwise."' 
"i think i should understand that better,' alice said very 
politely, "if i had it written down: but i can't quite follow it 
as you say it.' 
"that's nothing to what i could say if i chose,' the duchess 
replied, in a pleased tone. 
"pray don't trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,' 
said alice. 
"oh, don't talk about trouble!' said the duchess. "i make you 
a present of everything i've said as yet.' 
"a cheap sort of present!' thought alice. "i'm glad they don't 
give birthday presents like that!' but she did not venture to 
say it out loud. 
"thinking again?' the duchess asked, with another dig of her 
sharp little chin. 
"i've a right to think,' said alice sharply, for she was 
beginning to feel a little worried. 
"just about as much right,' said the duchess, "as pigs have to fly; 
and the m-' 
but here, to alice's great surprise, the duchess's voice died 
away, even in the middle of her favourite word "moral,' and the 
arm that was linked into hers began to tremble. alice looked up, 
and there stood the queen in front of them, with her arms folded, 
frowning like a thunderstorm. 
"a fine day, your majesty!' the duchess began in a low, weak 
voice. 
"now, i give you fair warning,' shouted the queen, stamping on 
the ground as she spoke; "either you or your head must be off, 
and that in about half no time! take your choice!' 
the duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment. 
"let's go on with the game,' the queen said to alice; and alice 
was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her 
back to the croquet-ground. 
the other guests had taken advantage of the queen's absence, 
and were resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, 
they hurried back to the game, the queen merely remarking that a 
moment's delay would cost them their lives. 
all the time they were playing the queen never left off 
quarrelling with the other players, and shouting "off with his 
head!' or "off with her head!' those whom she sentenced were 
taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave 
off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour 
or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the 
king, the queen, and alice, were in custody and under sentence of 
execution. 
then the queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to 
alice, "have you seen the mock turtle yet?' 
"no,' said alice. "i don't even know what a mock turtle is.' 
"it's the thing mock turtle soup is made from,' said the queen. 
"i never saw one, or heard of one,' said alice. 
"come on, then,' said the queen, "and he shall tell you his 
history,' 
as they walked off together, alice heard the king say in a low 
voice, to the company generally, "you are all pardoned.' "come, 
that's a good thing!' she said to herself, for she had felt quite 
unhappy at the number of executions the queen had ordered. 
they very soon came upon a gryphon, lying fast asleep in the 
sun. (if you don't know what a gryphon is, look at the picture.) 
"up, lazy thing!' said the queen, "and take this young lady to 
see the mock turtle, and to hear his history. i must go back and 
see after some executions i have ordered'; and she walked off, 
leaving alice alone with the gryphon. alice did not quite like 
the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would 
be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage 
queen: so she waited. 
the gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the 
queen till she was out of sight: then it chuckled. "what fun!' 
said the gryphon, half to itself, half to alice. 
"what is the fun?' said alice. 
"why, she,' said the gryphon. "it's all her fancy, that: they 
never executes nobody, you know. come on!' 
"everybody says "come on!" here,' thought alice, as she went 
slowly after it: "i never was so ordered about in all my life, 
never!' 
they had not gone far before they saw the mock turtle in the 
distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, 
as they came nearer, alice could hear him sighing as if his heart 
would break. she pitied him deeply. "what is his sorrow?' she 
asked the gryphon, and the gryphon answered, very nearly in the 
same words as before, "it's all his fancy, that: he hasn't got 
no sorrow, you know. come on!' 
so they went up to the mock turtle, who looked at them with 
large eyes full of tears, but said nothing. 
"this here young lady,' said the gryphon, "she wants for to 
know your history, she do.' 
"i'll tell it her,' said the mock turtle in a deep, hollow 
tone: "sit down, both of you, and don't speak a word till i've 
finished.' 
so they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. alice 
thought to herself, "i don't see how he can even finish, if he 
doesn't begin.' but she waited patiently. 
"once,' said the mock turtle at last, with a deep sigh, "i was 
a real turtle.' 
these words were followed by a very long silence, broken only 
by an occasional exclamation of "hjckrrh!' from the gryphon, and 
the constant heavy sobbing of the mock turtle. alice was very 
nearly getting up and saying, "thank you, sir, for your 
interesting story,' but she could not help thinking there must be 
more to come, so she sat still and said nothing. 
"when we were little,' the mock turtle went on at last, more 
calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, "we went to 
school in the sea. the master was an old turtle-we used to call 
him tortoise-' 
"why did you call him tortoise, if he wasn't one?' alice asked. 
"we called him tortoise because he taught us,' said the mock 
turtle angrily: "really you are very dull!' 
"you ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple 
question,' added the gryphon; and then they both sat silent and 
looked at poor alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. at 
last the gryphon said to the mock turtle, "drive on, old fellow! 
don't be all day about it!' and he went on in these words: 
"yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn't believe 
it-' 
"i never said i didn't!' interrupted alice. 
"you did,' said the mock turtle. 
"hold your tongue!' added the gryphon, before alice could speak 
again. the mock turtle went on. 
"we had the best of educations-in fact, we went to school 
every day-' 
"i've been to a day-school, too,' said alice; "you needn't be 
so proud as all that.' 
"with extras?' asked the mock turtle a little anxiously. 
"yes,' said alice, "we learned french and music.' 
"and washing?' said the mock turtle. 
"certainly not!' said alice indignantly. 
"ah! then yours wasn't a really good school,' said the mock 
turtle in a tone of great relief. "now at ours they had at the 
end of the bill, "french, music, and washing-extra."' 
"you couldn't have wanted it much,' said alice; "living at the 
bottom of the sea.' 
"i couldn't afford to learn it.' said the mock turtle with a 
sigh. "i only took the regular course.' 
"what was that?' inquired alice. 
"reeling and writhing, of course, to begin with,' the mock 
turtle replied; "and then the different branches of arithmetic- 
ambition, distraction, uglification, and derision.' 
"i never heard of "uglification,"' alice ventured to say. "what is it?' 
the gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. "what! never 
heard of uglifying!' it exclaimed. "you know what to beautify is, 
i suppose?' 
"yes,' said alice doubtfully: "it means-to-make-anything-prettier.' 
"well, then,' the gryphon went on, "if you don't know what to 
uglify is, you are a simpleton.' 
alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about 
it, so she turned to the mock turtle, and said "what else had you 
to learn?' 
"well, there was mystery,' the mock turtle replied, counting 
off the subjects on his flappers, "-mystery, ancient and modern, 
with seaography: then drawling-the drawling-master was an old 
conger-eel, that used to come once a week: he taught us 
drawling, stretching, and fainting in coils.' 
"what was that like?' said alice. 
"well, i can't show it you myself,' the mock turtle said: "i'm 
too stiff. and the gryphon never learnt it.' 
"hadn't time,' said the gryphon: "i went to the classics 
master, though. he was an old crab, he was.' 
"i never went to him,' the mock turtle said with a sigh: "he 
taught laughing and grief, they used to say.' 
"so he did, so he did,' said the gryphon, sighing in his turn; 
and both creatures hid their faces in their paws. 
"and how many hours a day did you do lessons?' said alice, in a 
hurry to change the subject. 
"ten hours the first day,' said the mock turtle: "nine the 
next, and so on.' 
"what a curious plan!' exclaimed alice. 
"that's the reason they're called lessons,' the gryphon 
remarked: "because they lessen from day to day.' 
this was quite a new idea to alice, and she thought it over a 
little before she made her next remark. "then the eleventh day 
must have been a holiday?' 
"of course it was,' said the mock turtle. 
"and how did you manage on the twelfth?' alice went on eagerly. 
"that's enough about lessons,' the gryphon interrupted in a 
very decided tone: "tell her something about the games now.' 
chapter x 
the lobster quadrille 
the mock turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper 
across his eyes. he looked at alice, and tried to speak, but for 
a minute or two sobs choked his voice. "same as if he had a bone 
in his throat,' said the gryphon: and it set to work shaking him 
and punching him in the back. at last the mock turtle recovered 
his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on 
again:- 
"you may not have lived much under the sea-' ("i haven't,' said alice)- 
"and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster-' 
(alice began to say "i once tasted-' but checked herself hastily, 
and said "no, never') "-so you can have no idea what a delightful 
thing a lobster quadrille is!' 
"no, indeed,' said alice. "what sort of a dance is it?' 
"why,' said the gryphon, "you first form into a line along the sea-shore-' 
"two lines!' cried the mock turtle. "seals, turtles, salmon, and so on; 
then, when you've cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way-' 
"that generally takes some time,' interrupted the gryphon. 
"-you advance twice-' 
"each with a lobster as a partner!' cried the gryphon. 
"of course,' the mock turtle said: "advance twice, set to 
partners-' 
"-change lobsters, and retire in same order,' continued the 
gryphon. 
"then, you know,' the mock turtle went on, "you throw the-' 
"the lobsters!' shouted the gryphon, with a bound into the air. 
"-as far out to sea as you can-' 
"swim after them!' screamed the gryphon. 
"turn a somersault in the sea!' cried the mock turtle, 
capering wildly about. 
"change lobster's again!' yelled the gryphon at the top of its voice. 
"back to land again, and that's all the first figure,' said the 
mock turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, 
who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat 
down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at alice. 
"it must be a very pretty dance,' said alice timidly. 
"would you like to see a little of it?' said the mock turtle. 
"very much indeed,' said alice. 
"come, let's try the first figure!' said the mock turtle to the 
gryphon. "we can do without lobsters, you know. which shall 
sing?' 
"oh, you sing,' said the gryphon. "i've forgotten the words.' 
so they began solemnly dancing round and round alice, every now 
and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and 
waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the mock turtle 
sang this, very slowly and sadly:- 
""will you walk a little faster?" said a whiting to a snail. 
"there's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my 
tail. 
see how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance! 
they are waiting on the shingle-will you come and join the 
dance? 
will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the 
dance? 
will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the 
dance? 
"you can really have no notion how delightful it will be 
when they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to 
sea!" 
but the snail replied "too far, too far!" and gave a look 
askance- 
said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the 
dance. 
would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join 
the dance. 
would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join 
the dance. 
""what matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied. 
"there is another shore, you know, upon the other side. 
the further off from england the nearer is to france- 
then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance. 
will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the 
dance? 
will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the 
dance?"' 
"thank you, it's a very interesting dance to watch,' said 
alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last: "and i do so 
like that curious song about the whiting!' 
"oh, as to the whiting,' said the mock turtle, "they-you've 
seen them, of course?' 
"yes,' said alice, "i've often seen them at dinn-' she 
checked herself hastily. 
"i don't know where dinn may be,' said the mock turtle, "but 
if you've seen them so often, of course you know what they're 
like.' 
"i believe so,' alice replied thoughtfully. "they have their 
tails in their mouths-and they're all over crumbs.' 
"you're wrong about the crumbs,' said the mock turtle: 
"crumbs would all wash off in the sea. but they have their tails 
in their mouths; and the reason is-' here the mock turtle 
yawned and shut his eyes.-"tell her about the reason and all 
that,' he said to the gryphon. 
"the reason is,' said the gryphon, "that they would go with 
the lobsters to the dance. so they got thrown out to sea. so 
they had to fall a long way. so they got their tails fast in 
their mouths. so they couldn't get them out again. that's all.' 
"thank you,' said alice, "it's very interesting. i never knew 
so much about a whiting before.' 
"i can tell you more than that, if you like,' said the 
gryphon. "do you know why it's called a whiting?' 
"i never thought about it,' said alice. "why?' 
"it does the boots and shoes.' the gryphon replied very 
solemnly. 
alice was thoroughly puzzled. "does the boots and shoes!' she 
repeated in a wondering tone. 
"why, what are your shoes done with?' said the gryphon. "i 
mean, what makes them so shiny?' 
alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she 
gave her answer. "they're done with blacking, i believe.' 
"boots and shoes under the sea,' the gryphon went on in a deep 
voice, "are done with a whiting. now you know.' 
"and what are they made of?' alice asked in a tone of great 
curiosity. 
"soles and eels, of course,' the gryphon replied rather 
impatiently: "any shrimp could have told you that.' 
"if i'd been the whiting,' said alice, whose thoughts were 
still running on the song, "i'd have said to the porpoise, "keep 
back, please: we don't want you with us!"' 
"they were obliged to have him with them,' the mock turtle 
said: "no wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.' 
"wouldn't it really?' said alice in a tone of great surprise. 
"of course not,' said the mock turtle: "why, if a fish came 
to me, and told me he was going a journey, i should say "with 
what porpoise?"' 
"don't you mean "purpose"?' said alice. 
"i mean what i say,' the mock turtle replied in an offended 
tone. and the gryphon added "come, let's hear some of your 
adventures.' 
"i could tell you my adventures-beginning from this morning,' 
said alice a little timidly: "but it's no use going back to 
yesterday, because i was a different person then.' 
"explain all that,' said the mock turtle. 
"no, no! the adventures first,' said the gryphon in an 
impatient tone: "explanations take such a dreadful time.' 
so alice began telling them her adventures from the time when 
she first saw the white rabbit. she was a little nervous about 
it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on 
each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so very wide, but she 
gained courage as she went on. her listeners were perfectly 
quiet till she got to the part about her repeating "you are old, 
father william,' to the caterpillar, and the words all coming 
different, and then the mock turtle drew a long breath, and said 
"that's very curious.' 
"it's all about as curious as it can be,' said the gryphon. 
"it all came different!' the mock turtle repeated 
thoughtfully. "i should like to hear her try and repeat 
something now. tell her to begin.' he looked at the gryphon as 
if he thought it had some kind of authority over alice. 
"stand up and repeat "'tis the voice of the sluggard,"' said 
the gryphon. 
"how the creatures order one about, and make one repeat 
lessons!' thought alice; "i might as well be at school at once.' 
however, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so 
full of the lobster quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was 
saying, and the words came very queer indeed:- 
"'tis the voice of the lobster; i heard him declare, 
"you have baked me too brown, i must sugar my hair." 
as a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose 
trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.' 
[later editions continued as follows 
when the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark, 
and will talk in contemptuous tones of the shark, 
but, when the tide rises and sharks are around, 
his voice has a timid and tremulous sound.] 
"that's different from what i used to say when i was a child,' 
said the gryphon. 
"well, i never heard it before,' said the mock turtle; "but it 
sounds uncommon nonsense.' 
alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her 
hands, wondering if anything would ever happen in a natural way 
again. 
"i should like to have it explained,' said the mock turtle. 
"she can't explain it,' said the gryphon hastily. "go on with 
the next verse.' 
"but about his toes?' the mock turtle persisted. "how could 
he turn them out with his nose, you know?' 
"it's the first position in dancing.' alice said; but was 
dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the 
subject. 
"go on with the next verse,' the gryphon repeated impatiently: 
"it begins "i passed by his garden."' 
alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would 
all come wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:- 
"i passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye, 
how the owl and the panther were sharing a pie-' 
[later editions continued as follows 
the panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat, 
while the owl had the dish as its share of the treat. 
when the pie was all finished, the owl, as a boon, 
was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon: 
while the panther received knife and fork with a growl, 
and concluded the banquet-] 
"what is the use of repeating all that stuff,' the mock turtle 
interrupted, "if you don't explain it as you go on? it's by far 
the most confusing thing i ever heard!' 
"yes, i think you'd better leave off,' said the gryphon: and 
alice was only too glad to do so. 
"shall we try another figure of the lobster quadrille?' the 
gryphon went on. "or would you like the mock turtle to sing you 
a song?' 
"oh, a song, please, if the mock turtle would be so kind,' 
alice replied, so eagerly that the gryphon said, in a rather 
offended tone, "hm! no accounting for tastes! sing her 
"turtle soup," will you, old fellow?' 
the mock turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes 
choked with sobs, to sing this:- 
"beautiful soup, so rich and green, 
waiting in a hot tureen! 
who for such dainties would not stoop? 
soup of the evening, beautiful soup! 
soup of the evening, beautiful soup! 
beau-ootiful soo-oop! 
beau-ootiful soo-oop! 
soo-oop of the e-e-evening, 
beautiful, beautiful soup! 
"beautiful soup! who cares for fish, 
game, or any other dish? 
who would not give all else for two p 
ennyworth only of beautiful soup? 
pennyworth only of beautiful soup? 
beau-ootiful soo-oop! 
beau-ootiful soo-oop! 
soo-oop of the e-e-evening, 
beautiful, beauti-ful soup!' 
"chorus again!' cried the gryphon, and the mock turtle had 
just begun to repeat it, when a cry of "the trial's beginning!' 
was heard in the distance. 
"come on!' cried the gryphon, and, taking alice by the hand, 
it hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song. 
"what trial is it?' alice panted as she ran; but the gryphon 
only answered "come on!' and ran the faster, while more and more 
faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the 
melancholy words:- 
"soo-oop of the e-e-evening, 
beautiful, beautiful soup!' 
chapter xi 
who stole the tarts? 
the king and queen of hearts were seated on their throne when 
they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them-all sorts 
of little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: 
the knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on 
each side to guard him; and near the king was the white rabbit, 
with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the 
other. in the very middle of the court was a table, with a large 
dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good, that it made alice 
quite hungry to look at them-"i wish they'd get the trial done,' 
she thought, "and hand round the refreshments!' but there seemed 
to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about 
her, to pass away the time. 
alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had 
read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that 
she knew the name of nearly everything there. "that's the 
judge,' she said to herself, "because of his great wig.' 
the judge, by the way, was the king; and as he wore his crown 
over the wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he 
did it,) he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly 
not becoming. 
"and that's the jury-box,' thought alice, "and those twelve 
creatures,' (she was obliged to say "creatures,' you see, because 
some of them were animals, and some were birds,) "i suppose they 
are the jurors.' she said this last word two or three times over 
to herself, being rather proud of it: for she thought, and 
rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the 
meaning of it at all. however, "jury-men' would have done just 
as well. 
the twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. 
"what are they doing?' alice whispered to the gryphon. "they 
can't have anything to put down yet, before the trial's begun.' 
"they're putting down their names,' the gryphon whispered in 
reply, "for fear they should forget them before the end of the 
trial.' 
"stupid things!' alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but 
she stopped hastily, for the white rabbit cried out, "silence in 
the court!' and the king put on his spectacles and looked 
anxiously round, to make out who was talking. 
alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their 
shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down "stupid things!' 
on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them 
didn't know how to spell "stupid,' and that he had to ask his 
neighbour to tell him. "a nice muddle their slates'll be in 
before the trial's over!' thought alice. 
one of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. this of course, 
alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got 
behind him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it 
away. she did it so quickly that the poor little juror (it was 
bill, the lizard) could not make out at all what had become of 
it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write 
with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was of very 
little use, as it left no mark on the slate. 
"herald, read the accusation!' said the king. 
on this the white rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and 
then unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:- 
"the queen of hearts, she made some tarts, 
all on a summer day: 
the knave of hearts, he stole those tarts, 
and took them quite away!' 
"consider your verdict,' the king said to the jury. 
"not yet, not yet!' the rabbit hastily interrupted. "there's 
a great deal to come before that!' 
"call the first witness,' said the king; and the white rabbit 
blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, "first 
witness!' 
the first witness was the hatter. he came in with a teacup in 
one hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. "i beg 
pardon, your majesty,' he began, "for bringing these in: but i 
hadn't quite finished my tea when i was sent for.' 
"you ought to have finished,' said the king. "when did you 
begin?' 
the hatter looked at the march hare, who had followed him into 
the court, arm-in-arm with the dormouse. "fourteenth of march, i 
think it was,' he said. 
"fifteenth,' said the march hare. 
"sixteenth,' added the dormouse. 
"write that down,' the king said to the jury, and the jury 
eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then 
added them up, and reduced the answer to shillings and pence. 
"take off your hat,' the king said to the hatter. 
"it isn't mine,' said the hatter. 
"stolen!' the king exclaimed, turning to the jury, who 
instantly made a memorandum of the fact. 
"i keep them to sell,' the hatter added as an explanation; 
"i've none of my own. i'm a hatter.' 
here the queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the 
hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted. 
"give your evidence,' said the king; "and don't be nervous, or 
i'll have you executed on the spot.' 
this did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept 
shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the 
queen, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his 
teacup instead of the bread-and-butter. 
just at this moment alice felt a very curious sensation, which 
puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was 
beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she 
would get up and leave the court; but on second thoughts she 
decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for 
her. 
"i wish you wouldn't squeeze so.' said the dormouse, who was 
sitting next to her. "i can hardly breathe.' 
"i can't help it,' said alice very meekly: "i'm growing.' 
"you've no right to grow here,' said the dormouse. 
"don't talk nonsense,' said alice more boldly: "you know 
you're growing too.' 
"yes, but i grow at a reasonable pace,' said the dormouse: 
"not in that ridiculous fashion.' and he got up very sulkily 
and crossed over to the other side of the court. 
all this time the queen had never left off staring at the 
hatter, and, just as the dormouse crossed the court, she said to 
one of the officers of the court, "bring me the list of the 
singers in the last concert!' on which the wretched hatter 
trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off. 
"give your evidence,' the king repeated angrily, "or i'll have 
you executed, whether you're nervous or not.' 
"i'm a poor man, your majesty,' the hatter began, in a 
trembling voice, "-and i hadn't begun my tea-not above a week 
or so-and what with the bread-and-butter getting so thin-and 
the twinkling of the tea-' 
"the twinkling of the what?' said the king. 
"it began with the tea,' the hatter replied. 
"of course twinkling begins with a t!' said the king sharply. 
"do you take me for a dunce? go on!' 
"i'm a poor man,' the hatter went on, "and most things 
twinkled after that-only the march hare said-' 
"i didn't!' the march hare interrupted in a great hurry. 
"you did!' said the hatter. 
"i deny it!' said the march hare. 
"he denies it,' said the king: "leave out that part.' 
"well, at any rate, the dormouse said-' the hatter went on, 
looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the 
dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep. 
"after that,' continued the hatter, "i cut some more bread- 
and-butter-' 
"but what did the dormouse say?' one of the jury asked. 
"that i can't remember,' said the hatter. 
"you must remember,' remarked the king, "or i'll have you 
executed.' 
the miserable hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, 
and went down on one knee. "i'm a poor man, your majesty,' he 
began. 
"you're a very poor speaker,' said the king. 
here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately 
suppressed by the officers of the court. (as that is rather a 
hard word, i will just explain to you how it was done. they had 
a large canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings: 
into this they slipped the guinea-pig, head first, and then sat 
upon it.) 
"i'm glad i've seen that done,' thought alice. "i've so often 
read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, "there was some 
attempts at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the 
officers of the court," and i never understood what it meant 
till now.' 
"if that's all you know about it, you may stand down,' 
continued the king. 
"i can't go no lower,' said the hatter: "i'm on the floor, as 
it is.' 
"then you may sit down,' the king replied. 
here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed. 
"come, that finished the guinea-pigs!' thought alice. "now we 
shall get on better.' 
"i'd rather finish my tea,' said the hatter, with an anxious 
look at the queen, who was reading the list of singers. 
"you may go,' said the king, and the hatter hurriedly left the 
court, without even waiting to put his shoes on. 
"-and just take his head off outside,' the queen added to one 
of the officers: but the hatter was out of sight before the 
officer could get to the door. 
"call the next witness!' said the king. 
the next witness was the duchess's cook. she carried the 
pepper-box in her hand, and alice guessed who it was, even before 
she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began 
sneezing all at once. 
"give your evidence,' said the king. 
"shan't,' said the cook. 
the king looked anxiously at the white rabbit, who said in a 
low voice, "your majesty must cross-examine this witness.' 
"well, if i must, i must,' the king said, with a melancholy 
air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till 
his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, "what 
are tarts made of?' 
"pepper, mostly,' said the cook. 
"treacle,' said a sleepy voice behind her. 
"collar that dormouse,' the queen shrieked out. "behead that 
dormouse! turn that dormouse out of court! suppress him! pinch 
him! off with his whiskers!' 
for some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the 
dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had settled down 
again, the cook had disappeared. 
"never mind!' said the king, with an air of great relief. 
"call the next witness.' and he added in an undertone to the 
queen, "really, my dear, you must cross-examine the next witness. 
it quite makes my forehead ache!' 
alice watched the white rabbit as he fumbled over the list, 
feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like, 
"-for they haven't got much evidence yet,' she said to herself. 
imagine her surprise, when the white rabbit read out, at the top 
of his shrill little voice, the name "alice!' 
chapter xii 
alice's evidence 
"here!' cried alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the 
moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she 
jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with 
the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads 
of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding 
her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset 
the week before. 
"oh, i beg your pardon!' she exclaimed in a tone of great 
dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could, 
for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and 
she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once 
and put back into the jury-box, or they would die. 
"the trial cannot proceed,' said the king in a very grave 
voice, "until all the jurymen are back in their proper places- 
all,' he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at alice as 
he said do. 
alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she 
had put the lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing 
was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable 
to move. she soon got it out again, and put it right; "not that 
it signifies much,' she said to herself; "i should think it 
would be quite as much use in the trial one way up as the other.' 
as soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of 
being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and 
handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write 
out a history of the accident, all except the lizard, who seemed 
too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open, 
gazing up into the roof of the court. 
"what do you know about this business?' the king said to 
alice. 
"nothing,' said alice. 
"nothing whatever?' persisted the king. 
"nothing whatever,' said alice. 
"that's very important,' the king said, turning to the jury. 
they were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when 
the white rabbit interrupted: "unimportant, your majesty means, 
of course,' he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and 
making faces at him as he spoke. 
"unimportant, of course, i meant,' the king hastily said, and 
went on to himself in an undertone, "important-unimportant- 
unimportant-important-' as if he were trying which word 
sounded best. 
some of the jury wrote it down "important,' and some 
"unimportant.' alice could see this, as she was near enough to 
look over their slates; "but it doesn't matter a bit,' she 
thought to herself. 
at this moment the king, who had been for some time busily 
writing in his note-book, cackled out "silence!' and read out 
from his book, "rule forty-two. all persons more than a mile 
high to leave the court.' 
everybody looked at alice. 
"i'm not a mile high,' said alice. 
"you are,' said the king. 
"nearly two miles high,' added the queen. 
"well, i shan't go, at any rate,' said alice: "besides, 
that's not a regular rule: you invented it just now.' 
"it's the oldest rule in the book,' said the king. 
"then it ought to be number one,' said alice. 
the king turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. 
"consider your verdict,' he said to the jury, in a low, trembling 
voice. 
"there's more evidence to come yet, please your majesty,' said 
the white rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; "this paper has 
just been picked up.' 
"what's in it?' said the queen. 
"i haven't opened it yet,' said the white rabbit, "but it seems 
to be a letter, written by the prisoner to-to somebody.' 
"it must have been that,' said the king, "unless it was 
written to nobody, which isn't usual, you know.' 
"who is it directed to?' said one of the jurymen. 
"it isn't directed at all,' said the white rabbit; "in fact, 
there's nothing written on the outside.' he unfolded the paper 
as he spoke, and added "it isn't a letter, after all: it's a set 
of verses.' 
"are they in the prisoner's handwriting?' asked another of 
they jurymen. 
"no, they're not,' said the white rabbit, "and that's the 
queerest thing about it.' (the jury all looked puzzled.) 
"he must have imitated somebody else's hand,' said the king. 
(the jury all brightened up again.) 
"please your majesty,' said the knave, "i didn't write it, and 
they can't prove i did: there's no name signed at the end.' 
"if you didn't sign it,' said the king, "that only makes the 
matter worse. you must have meant some mischief, or else you'd 
have signed your name like an honest man.' 
there was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the 
first really clever thing the king had said that day. 
"that proves his guilt,' said the queen. 
"it proves nothing of the sort!' said alice. "why, you don't 
even know what they're about!' 
"read them,' said the king. 
the white rabbit put on his spectacles. "where shall i begin, 
please your majesty?' he asked. 
"begin at the beginning,' the king said gravely, "and go on 
till you come to the end: then stop.' 
these were the verses the white rabbit read:- 
"they told me you had been to her, 
and mentioned me to him: 
she gave me a good character, 
but said i could not swim. 
he sent them word i had not gone 
(we know it to be true): 
if she should push the matter on, 
what would become of you? 
i gave her one, they gave him two, 
you gave us three or more; 
they all returned from him to you, 
though they were mine before. 
if i or she should chance to be 
involved in this affair, 
he trusts to you to set them free, 
exactly as we were. 
my notion was that you had been 
(before she had this fit) 
an obstacle that came between 
him, and ourselves, and it. 
don't let him know she liked them best, 
for this must ever be 
a secret, kept from all the rest, 
between yourself and me.' 
"that's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet,' 
said the king, rubbing his hands; "so now let the jury-' 
"if any one of them can explain it,' said alice, (she had 
grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit 
afraid of interrupting him,) "i'll give him sixpence. _i_ don't 
believe there's an atom of meaning in it.' 
the jury all wrote down on their slates, "she doesn't believe 
there's an atom of meaning in it,' but none of them attempted to 
explain the paper. 
"if there's no meaning in it,' said the king, "that saves a 
world of trouble, you know, as we needn't try to find any. and 
yet i don't know,' he went on, spreading out the verses on his 
knee, and looking at them with one eye; "i seem to see some 
meaning in them, after all. "-said i could not swim-" you 
can't swim, can you?' he added, turning to the knave. 
the knave shook his head sadly. "do i look like it?' he said. 
(which he certainly did not, being made entirely of cardboard.) 
"all right, so far,' said the king, and he went on muttering 
over the verses to himself: ""we know it to be true-" that's 
the jury, of course- "i gave her one, they gave him two-" why, 
that must be what he did with the tarts, you know-' 
"but, it goes on "they all returned from him to you,"' said 
alice. 
"why, there they are!' said the king triumphantly, pointing to 
the tarts on the table. "nothing can be clearer than that. 
then again-"before she had this fit-" you never had fits, my 
dear, i think?' he said to the queen. 
"never!' said the queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the 
lizard as she spoke. (the unfortunate little bill had left off 
writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no 
mark; but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was 
trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.) 
"then the words don't fit you,' said the king, looking round 
the court with a smile. there was a dead silence. 
"it's a pun!' the king added in an offended tone, and 
everybody laughed, "let the jury consider their verdict,' the 
king said, for about the twentieth time that day. 
"no, no!' said the queen. "sentence first-verdict afterwards.' 
"stuff and nonsense!' said alice loudly. "the idea of having 
the sentence first!' 
"hold your tongue!' said the queen, turning purple. 
"i won't!' said alice. 
"off with her head!' the queen shouted at the top of her voice. 
nobody moved. 
"who cares for you?' said alice, (she had grown to her full 
size by this time.) "you're nothing but a pack of cards!' 
at this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying 
down upon her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half 
of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on 
the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently 
brushing away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the 
trees upon her face. 
"wake up, alice dear!' said her sister; "why, what a long 
sleep you've had!' 
"oh, i've had such a curious dream!' said alice, and she told 
her sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange 
adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and 
when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, "it was a 
curious dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it's 
getting late.' so alice got up and ran off, thinking while she 
ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been. 
but her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her 
head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of 
little alice and all her wonderful adventures, till she too began 
dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream:- 
first, she dreamed of little alice herself, and once again the 
tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes 
were looking up into hers-she could hear the very tones of her 
voice, and see that queer little toss of her head to keep back 
the wandering hair that would always get into her eyes-and 
still as she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place 
around her became alive the strange creatures of her little 
sister's dream. 
the long grass rustled at her feet as the white rabbit hurried 
by-the frightened mouse splashed his way through the 
neighbouring pool-she could hear the rattle of the teacups as 
the march hare and his friends shared their never-ending meal, 
and the shrill voice of the queen ordering off her unfortunate 
guests to execution-once more the pig-baby was sneezing on the 
duchess's knee, while plates and dishes crashed around it-once 
more the shriek of the gryphon, the squeaking of the lizard's 
slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs, 
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable 
mock turtle. 
so she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in 
wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and 
all would change to dull reality-the grass would be only 
rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the 
reeds-the rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheep- 
bells, and the queen's shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd 
boy-and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the gryphon, and 
all thy other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the 
confused clamour of the busy farm-yard-while the lowing of the 
cattle in the distance would take the place of the mock turtle's 
heavy sobs. 
lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of 
hers would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how 
she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and 
loving heart of her childhood: and how she would gather about 
her other little children, and make their eyes bright and eager 
with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of 
wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with all their 
simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys, 
remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days. 
the end 
*project gutenberg's the picture of dorian gray by oscar wilde* 
*** etexts from the original internet information providers *** 
please take a look at the important information in this header. 
we encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an 
electronic path open for the next readers. do not remove this. 
**welcome to the world of free plain vanilla electronic texts** 
**etexts readable by both humans and by computers, since 1971** 
*these etexts prepared by hundreds of volunteers and donations* 
information on contacting project gutenberg to get etexts, and 
further information is included below. we need your donations. 
the picture of dorian gray 
by oscar wilde 
october, 1994 etext #174 
[date last updated: april 11, 2006] 
*project gutenberg's the picture of dorian gray by oscar wilde* 
*****this file should be named dgray10.txt or dgray10.zip***** 
corrected editions of our etexts get a new number, dgray11.txt. 
versions based on separate sources get new letter, dgray10a.txt. 
this etext was created by judith boss, omaha, nebraska. the 
equipment: an ibm-compatible 486/33, a hewlett-packard scanjet 
iic flatbed scanner, and calera recognition systems' m/series 
professional ocr software and risc accelerator board. 
information about project gutenberg (one page) 
we produce about one million dollars for each hour we work. one 
hundred hours is a conservative estimate for how long it we take 
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright 
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc. this 
projected audience is one hundred million readers. if our value 
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar, then we produce a 
million dollars per hour; next year we will have to do four text 
files per month, thus upping our productivity to two million/hr. 
the goal of project gutenberg is to give away one trillion etext 
files by the december 31, 2001. [10,000 x 100,000,000=trillion] 
this is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers. 
we need your donations more than ever! 
all donations should be made to "project gutenberg/ibc", and are 
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law ("ibc" is illinois 
benedictine college). (subscriptions to our paper newsletter go 
to ibc, too) 
for these and other matters, please mail to: 
david turner, project gutenberg 
illinois benedictine college 
5700 college road 
lisle, il 60532-0900 
email requests to: 
internet: chipmonk@eagle.ibc.edu (david turner) 
compuserve: chipmonk@eagle.ibc.edu (david turner) 
attmail: internet!chipmonk@eagle.ibc.edu (david turner) 
mcimail: (david turner) 
address type: mci / ems: internet / mbx:chipmonk@eagle.ibc.edu 
we would prefer to send you this information by email 
(internet, bitnet, compuserve, attmail or mcimail). 
if you have an ftp program (or emulator), please: 
ftp directly to the project gutenberg archives: 
ftp mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu 
login: anonymous 
password: your@login 
cd etext/etext91 
or cd etext92 [for new books] [now also cd etext/etext92] 
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information] 
dir [to see files] 
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files] 
get index and aaindex 
for a list of books 
and 
get new gut for general information 
and 
mget gut* for newsletters. 
**information prepared by the project gutenberg legal advisor** 
(three pages) 
****start**the small print!**for public domain etexts**start**** 
why is this "small print!" statement here? you know: lawyers. 
they tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with 
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from 
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our 
fault. so, among other things, this "small print!" statement 
disclaims most of our liability to you. it also tells you how 
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to. 
*before!* you use or read this etext 
by using or reading any part of this project gutenberg-tm etext, 
you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept this 
"small print!" statement. if you do not, you can receive a 
refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by sending 
a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person you got 
it from. if you received this etext on a physical medium (such 
as a disk), you must return it with your request. 
about project gutenberg-tm etexts 
this project gutenberg-tm etext, like most project gutenberg-tm 
etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by professor 
michael s. hart through the project gutenberg association (the 
"project"). among other things, this means that no one owns a 
united states copyright on or for this work, so the project (and 
you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special 
rules, set forth below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute 
this etext under the project's "project gutenberg" trademark. 
to create these etexts, the project expends considerable efforts 
to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain works. 
despite these efforts, the project's etexts and any medium they 
may be on may contain "defects". among other things, defects 
may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, 
transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property 
infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other etext medium, 
a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be 
read by your equipment. 
disclaimer 
but for the "right of replacement or refund" described below, 
[1] the project (and any other party you may receive this etext 
from as a project gutenberg-tm etext) disclaims all liability to 
you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees, and 
[2] you have no remedies for negligence or under strict liability,  
or for breach of warranty or contract, including but not 
limited to indirect, consequential, punitive or incidental 
damages, even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damages. 
if you discover a defect in this etext within 90 days of 
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you 
paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that time to 
the person you received it from. if you received it on a 
physical medium, you must return it with your note, and such 
person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement copy. 
if you received it electronically, such person may choose to 
alternatively give you a second opportunity to receive it electronically. 
this etext is otherwise provided to you "as-is". no other 
warranties of any kind, express or implied, are made to you as 
to the etext or any medium it may be on, including but not 
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for a 
particular purpose. 
some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or 
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the 
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you 
may have other legal rights. 
indemnity 
you will indemnify and hold the project, its directors, 
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost 
and expense, including legal fees, that arise from any 
distribution of this etext for which you are responsible, and 
from [1] any alteration, modification or addition to the etext 
for which you are responsible, or [2] any defect. 
distribution under "project gutenberg-tm" 
you may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by 
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this "small 
print!" and all other references to project gutenberg, or: 
[1] only give exact copies of it. among other things, this re- 
quires that you do not remove, alter or modify the etext or 
this "small print!" statement. you may however, if you 
wish, distribute this etext in machine readable binary, 
compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form, including any 
form resulting from conversion by word processing or hyper- 
text software, but only so long as *either*: 
[*] the etext, when displayed, is clearly readable. we 
consider an etext *not* clearly readable if it 
contains characters other than those intended by the 
author of the work, although tilde (~), asterisk (*) 
and underline (_) characters may be used to convey 
punctuation intended by the author, and additional 
characters may be used to indicate hypertext links. 
[*] the etext may be readily converted by the reader at no 
expense into plain ascii, ebcdic or equivalent form 
by the program that displays the etext (as is the 
case, for instance, with most word processors). 
[*] you provide, or agree to also provide on request at no 
additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the etext 
in its original plain ascii form (or in ebcdic or 
other equivalent proprietary form). 
[2] honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this 
"small print!" statement. 
[3] pay a trademark license fee of 20% (twenty percent) of the 
net profits you derive from distributing this etext under 
the trademark, determined in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting practices. the license fee: 
[*] is required only if you derive such profits. in 
distributing under our trademark, you incur no 
obligation to charge money or earn profits for your 
distribution. 
[*] shall be paid to "project gutenberg association / 
illinois benedictine college" (or to such other person 
as the project gutenberg association may direct) 
within the 60 days following each date you prepare (or 
were legally required to prepare) your year-end tax 
return with respect to your income for that year. 
what if you *want* to send money even if you don't have to? 
the project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time, 
scanning machines, ocr software, public domain etexts, royalty 
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution 
you can think of. money should be paid to "project gutenberg 
association / illinois benedictine college". 
write to us! we can be reached at: 
project gutenberg director of communications (pgdircom) 
internet: pgdircom@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu 
bitnet: pgdircom@uiucvmd 
compuserve: >internet:pgdircom@.vmd.cso.uiuc.edu 
attmail: internet!vmd.cso.uiuc.edu!pgdircom 
drafted by charles b. kramer, attorney 
compuserve: 72600,2026 
internet: 72600.2026@compuserve.com 
tel: (212) 254-5093 
*end*the small print! for public domain etexts*ver.07.02.92*end* 
the picture of dorian gray 
by 
oscar wilde 
the preface 
the artist is the creator of beautiful things. to reveal art and conceal 
the artist is art's aim. the critic is he who can translate into another 
manner or a new material his impression of beautiful things. 
the highest as the lowest form of criticism is a mode of autobiography. 
those who find ugly meanings in beautiful things are corrupt without 
being charming. this is a fault. 
those who find beautiful meanings in beautiful things are the cultivated. 
for these there is hope. they are the elect to whom beautiful things 
mean only beauty. 
there is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book. 
books are well written, or badly written. that is all. 
the nineteenth century dislike of realism is the rage of caliban 
seeing his own face in a glass. 
the nineteenth century dislike of romanticism is the rage of 
caliban not seeing his own face in a glass. the moral life of man 
forms part of the subject-matter of the artist, but the morality 
of art consists in the perfect use of an imperfect medium. 
no artist desires to prove anything. even things that are true 
can be proved. no artist has ethical sympathies. an ethical 
sympathy in an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style. 
no artist is ever morbid. the artist can express everything. 
thought and language are to the artist instruments of an art. 
vice and virtue are to the artist materials for an art. 
from the point of view of form, the type of all the arts is the art 
of the musician. from the point of view of feeling, the actor's 
craft is the type. all art is at once surface and symbol. 
those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril. 
those who read the symbol do so at their peril. 
it is the spectator, and not life, that art really mirrors. 
diversity of opinion about a work of art shows that the work 
is new, complex, and vital. when critics disagree, 
the artist is in accord with himself. we can forgive a man 
for making a useful thing as long as he does not admire it. 
the only excuse for making a useless thing is that one 
admires it intensely. 
all art is quite useless. 
oscar wilde 
chapter 1 
the studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when 
the light summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden, 
there came through the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, 
or the more delicate perfume of the pink-flowering thorn. 
from the corner of the divan of persian saddle-bags on which 
he was lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, 
lord henry wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and 
honey-coloured blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed 
hardly able to bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs; 
and now and then the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted 
across the long tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front 
of the huge window, producing a kind of momentary japanese effect, 
and making him think of those pallid, jade-faced painters of tokyo who, 
through the medium of an art that is necessarily immobile, 
seek to convey the sense of swiftness and motion. the sullen murmur 
of the bees shouldering their way through the long unmown grass, 
or circling with monotonous insistence round the dusty gilt horns of 
the straggling woodbine, seemed to make the stillness more oppressive. 
the dim roar of london was like the bourdon note of a distant organ. 
in the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the full-length 
portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty, and in front of it, 
some little distance away, was sitting the artist himself, basil hallward, 
whose sudden disappearance some years ago caused, at the time, such public 
excitement and gave rise to so many strange conjectures. 
as the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so skilfully 
mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his face, and seemed 
about to linger there. but he suddenly started up, and closing his eyes, 
placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he sought to imprison within his 
brain some curious dream from which he feared he might awake. 
"it is your best work, basil, the best thing you have ever done," 
said lord henry languidly. "you must certainly send it next year 
to the grosvenor. the academy is too large and too vulgar. 
whenever i have gone there, there have been either so many people that i 
have not been able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many 
pictures that i have not been able to see the people, which was worse. 
the grosvenor is really the only place." 
"i don't think i shall send it anywhere," he answered, tossing his head 
back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at oxford. 
"no, i won't send it anywhere." 
lord henry elevated his eyebrows and looked at him in amazement through 
the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls 
from his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette. "not send it anywhere? 
my dear fellow, why? have you any reason? what odd chaps you 
painters are! you do anything in the world to gain a reputation. 
as soon as you have one, you seem to want to throw it away. 
it is silly of you, for there is only one thing in the world worse 
than being talked about, and that is not being talked about. 
a portrait like this would set you far above all the young men in england, 
and make the old men quite jealous, if old men are ever capable of 
any emotion." 
"i know you will laugh at me," he replied, "but i really can't exhibit it. 
i have put too much of myself into it." 
lord henry stretched himself out on the divan and laughed. 
"yes, i knew you would; but it is quite true, all the same." 
"too much of yourself in it! upon my word, basil, 
i didn't know you were so vain; and i really can't see any resemblance 
between you, with your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, 
and this young adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory 
and rose-leaves. why, my dear basil, he is a narcissus, and you- 
well, of course you have an intellectual expression and all that. 
but beauty, real beauty, ends where an intellectual expression begins. 
intellect is in itself a mode of exaggeration, and destroys 
the harmony of any face. the moment one sits down to think, 
one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something horrid. 
look at the successful men in any of the learned professions. 
how perfectly hideous they are! except, of course, in the church. 
but then in the church they don't think. a bishop keeps on saying at 
the age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen, 
and as a natural consequence he always looks absolutely delightful. 
your mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, 
but whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks. i feel quite 
sure of that. he is some brainless beautiful creature who should be 
always here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always 
here in summer when we want something to chill our intelligence. 
don't flatter yourself, basil: you are not in the least like 
him." 
"you don't understand me, harry," answered the artist. "of course i am 
not like him. i know that perfectly well. indeed, i should be sorry 
to look like him. you shrug your shoulders? i am telling you the truth. 
there is a fatality about all physical and intellectual distinction, 
the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the faltering 
steps of kings. it is better not to be different from one's fellows. 
the ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world. they can sit 
at their ease and gape at the play. if they know nothing of victory, 
they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat. they live as we 
all should live-undisturbed, indifferent, and without disquiet. 
they neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it from alien hands. 
your rank and wealth, harry; my brains, such as they are-my art, whatever it 
may be worth; dorian gray's good looks-we shall all suffer for what the gods 
have given us, suffer terribly." 
"dorian gray? is that his name?" asked lord henry, walking across 
the studio towards basil hallward. 
"yes, that is his name. i didn't intend to tell it to you." 
"but why not?" 
"oh, i can't explain. when i like people immensely, i never tell 
their names to any one. it is like surrendering a part of them. 
i have grown to love secrecy. it seems to be the one thing 
that can make modern life mysterious or marvellous to us. 
the commonest thing is delightful if one only hides it. 
when i leave town now i never tell my people where i am going. 
if i did, i would lose all my pleasure. it is a silly habit, 
i dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great deal of romance 
into one's life. i suppose you think me awfully foolish 
about it?" 
"not at all," answered lord henry, "not at all, my dear basil. 
you seem to forget that i am married, and the one charm of marriage is 
that it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties. 
i never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what i am doing. 
when we meet-we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or go 
down to the duke's-we tell each other the most absurd stories with the most 
serious faces. my wife is very good at it-much better, in fact, than i am. 
she never gets confused over her dates, and i always do. but when she 
does find me out, she makes no row at all. i sometimes wish she would; 
but she merely laughs at me." 
"i hate the way you talk about your married life, harry," 
said basil hallward, strolling towards the door that led into 
the garden. "i believe that you are really a very good husband, 
but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues. 
you are an extraordinary fellow. you never say a moral thing, 
and you never do a wrong thing. your cynicism is simply 
a pose." 
"being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose i know," 
cried lord henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the garden 
together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that stood in the 
shade of a tall laurel bush. the sunlight slipped over the polished leaves. 
in the grass, white daisies were tremulous. 
after a pause, lord henry pulled out his watch. "i am afraid i 
must be going, basil," he murmured, "and before i go, i insist 
on your answering a question i put to you some time ago." 
"what is that?" said the painter, keeping his eyes fixed on the ground. 
"you know quite well." 
"i do not, harry." 
"well, i will tell you what it is. i want you to explain to me why you 
won't exhibit dorian gray's picture. i want the real reason." 
"i told you the real reason." 
"no, you did not. you said it was because there was too much 
of yourself in it. now, that is childish." 
"harry," said basil hallward, looking him straight in the face, 
"every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, 
not of the sitter. the sitter is merely the accident, the occasion. 
it is not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, 
on the coloured canvas, reveals himself. the reason i will not exhibit 
this picture is that i am afraid that i have shown in it the secret of my 
own soul." 
lord henry laughed. "and what is that?" he asked. 
"i will tell you," said hallward; but an expression of perplexity 
came over his face. 
"i am all expectation, basil," continued his companion, 
glancing at him. 
"oh, there is really very little to tell, harry," answered the painter; 
"and i am afraid you will hardly understand it. perhaps you will hardly 
believe it." 
lord henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy from 
the grass and examined it. "i am quite sure i shall understand it," 
he replied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk, 
"and as for believing things, i can believe anything, provided that it is 
quite incredible." 
the wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy lilac-blooms, 
with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the languid air. 
a grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a blue thread 
a long thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauze wings. 
lord henry felt as if he could hear basil hallward's heart beating, 
and wondered what was coming. 
"the story is simply this," said the painter after some time. 
"two months ago i went to a crush at lady brandon's. you know 
we poor artists have to show ourselves in society from time 
to time, just to remind the public that we are not savages. 
with an evening coat and a white tie, as you told me once, anybody, 
even a stock-broker, can gain a reputation for being civilized. 
well, after i had been in the room about ten minutes, 
talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious academicians, 
i suddenly became conscious that some one was looking at me. 
i turned half-way round and saw dorian gray for the first time. 
when our eyes met, i felt that i was growing pale. 
a curious sensation of terror came over me. i knew that i 
had come face to face with some one whose mere personality 
was so fascinating that, if i allowed it to do so, it would 
absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art itself. 
i did not want any external influence in my life. 
you know yourself, harry, how independent i am by nature. 
i have always been my own master; had at least always been so, 
till i met dorian gray. then-but i don't know how to explain 
it to you. something seemed to tell me that i was on the verge 
of a terrible crisis in my life. i had a strange feeling that 
fate had in store for me exquisite joys and exquisite sorrows. 
i grew afraid and turned to quit the room. it was not conscience 
that made me do so: it was a sort of cowardice. i take no 
credit to myself for trying to escape." 
"conscience and cowardice are really the same things, basil. 
conscience is the trade-name of the firm. that is all." 
"i don't believe that, harry, and i don't believe you do either. 
however, whatever was my motive-and it may have been pride, 
for i used to be very proud-i certainly struggled to the door. 
there, of course, i stumbled against lady brandon. 'you are not 
going to run away so soon, mr. hallward?' she screamed out. 
you know her curiously shrill voice?" 
"yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty," said lord henry, 
pulling the daisy to bits with his long nervous fingers. 
"i could not get rid of her. she brought me up to royalties, 
and people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic 
tiaras and parrot noses. she spoke of me as her dearest friend. 
i had only met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me. 
i believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, 
at least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is 
the nineteenth-century standard of immortality. suddenly i found myself 
face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely 
stirred me. we were quite close, almost touching. our eyes met again. 
it was reckless of me, but i asked lady brandon to introduce me to him. 
perhaps it was not so reckless, after all. it was simply inevitable. 
we would have spoken to each other without any introduction. 
i am sure of that. dorian told me so afterwards. he, too, felt that we 
were destined to know each other." 
"and how did lady brandon describe this wonderful young man?" 
asked his companion. "i know she goes in for giving 
a rapid precis of all her guests. i remember her bringing 
me up to a truculent and red-faced old gentleman covered 
all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my ear, 
in a tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible 
to everybody in the room, the most astounding details. 
i simply fled. i like to find out people for myself. 
but lady brandon treats her guests exactly as an auctioneer 
treats his goods. she either explains them entirely away, 
or tells one everything about them except what one wants 
to know." 
"poor lady brandon! you are hard on her, harry!" said hallward listlessly. 
"my dear fellow, she tried to found a salon, and only succeeded 
in opening a restaurant. how could i admire her? but tell me, 
what did she say about mr. dorian gray?" 
"oh, something like, 'charming boy-poor dear mother and i 
absolutely inseparable. quite forget what he does-afraid he- 
doesn't do anything-oh, yes, plays the piano-or is it 
the violin, dear mr. gray?' neither of us could help laughing, 
and we became friends at once." 
"laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, 
and it is far the best ending for one," said the young lord, 
plucking another daisy. 
hallward shook his head. "you don't understand what friendship is, harry," 
he murmured-"or what enmity is, for that matter. you like every one; 
that is to say, you are indifferent to every one." 
"how horribly unjust of you!" cried lord henry, tilting his hat back 
and looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins of glossy 
white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the summer sky. 
"yes; horribly unjust of you. i make a great difference between people. 
i choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for 
their good characters, and my enemies for their good intellects. 
a man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies. i have not 
got one who is a fool. they are all men of some intellectual power, 
and consequently they all appreciate me. is that very vain of me? 
i think it is rather vain." 
"i should think it was, harry. but according to your category i 
must be merely an acquaintance." 
"my dear old basil, you are much more than an acquaintance." 
"and much less than a friend. a sort of brother, i suppose?" 
"oh, brothers! i don't care for brothers. my elder brother won't die, 
and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else." 
"harry!" exclaimed hallward, frowning. 
"my dear fellow, i am not quite serious. but i can't help detesting 
my relations. i suppose it comes from the fact that none of us 
can stand other people having the same faults as ourselves. 
i quite sympathize with the rage of the english democracy against 
what they call the vices of the upper orders. the masses feel 
that drunkenness, stupidity, and immorality should be their own 
special property, and that if any one of us makes an ass of himself, 
he is poaching on their preserves. when poor southwark got 
into the divorce court, their indignation was quite magnificent. 
and yet i don't suppose that ten per cent of the proletariat 
live correctly." 
"i don't agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is more, 
harry, i feel sure you don't either." 
lord henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe 
of his patent-leather boot with a tasselled ebony cane. 
"how english you are basil! that is the second time you 
have made that observation. if one puts forward an idea 
to a true englishman-always a rash thing to do-he never 
dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong. 
the only thing he considers of any importance is whether one 
believes it oneself. now, the value of an idea has nothing 
whatsoever to do with the sincerity of the man who expresses it. 
indeed, the probabilities are that the more insincere 
the man is, the more purely intellectual will the idea be, 
as in that case it will not be coloured by either his wants, 
his desires, or his prejudices. however, i don't propose 
to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you. 
i like persons better than principles, and i like persons 
with no principles better than anything else in the world. 
tell me more about mr. dorian gray. how often do you 
see him?" 
"every day. i couldn't be happy if i didn't see him every day. 
he is absolutely necessary to me." 
"how extraordinary! i thought you would never care for anything 
but your art." 
"he is all my art to me now," said the painter gravely. 
"i sometimes think, harry, that there are only two eras of any 
importance in the world's history. the first is the appearance 
of a new medium for art, and the second is the appearance 
of a new personality for art also. what the invention 
of oil-painting was to the venetians, the face of antinous 
was to late greek sculpture, and the face of dorian gray will 
some day be to me. it is not merely that i paint from him, 
draw from him, sketch from him. of course, i have done all that. 
but he is much more to me than a model or a sitter. 
i won't tell you that i am dissatisfied with what i have done 
of him, or that his beauty is such that art cannot express it. 
there is nothing that art cannot express, and i know that 
the work i have done, since i met dorian gray, is good work, 
is the best work of my life. but in some curious way-i wonder 
will you understand me?-his personality has suggested to me 
an entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style. 
i see things differently, i think of them differently. 
i can now recreate life in a way that was hidden from me before. 
'a dream of form in days of thought'-who is it who says that? 
i forget; but it is what dorian gray has been to me. 
the merely visible presence of this lad-for he seems to me 
little more than a lad, though he is really over twenty- 
his merely visible presence-ah! i wonder can you realize 
all that that means? unconsciously he defines for me 
the lines of a fresh school, a school that is to have in it 
all the passion of the romantic spirit, all the perfection 
of the spirit that is greek. the harmony of soul and body- 
how much that is! we in our madness have separated the two, 
and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that 
is void. harry! if you only knew what dorian gray is to me! 
you remember that landscape of mine, for which agnew offered 
me such a huge price but which i would not part with? 
it is one of the best things i have ever done. and why 
is it so? because, while i was painting it, dorian gray sat 
beside me. some subtle influence passed from him to me, 
and for the first time in my life i saw in the plain 
woodland the wonder i had always looked for and always 
missed." 
"basil, this is extraordinary! i must see dorian gray." 
hallward got up from the seat and walked up and down the garden. 
after some time he came back. "harry," he said, "dorian gray 
is to me simply a motive in art. you might see nothing in him. 
i see everything in him. he is never more present in my work than 
when no image of him is there. he is a suggestion, as i have said, 
of a new manner. i find him in the curves of certain lines, 
in the loveliness and subtleties of certain colours. 
that is all." 
"then why won't you exhibit his portrait?" asked lord henry. 
"because, without intending it, i have put into it some expression 
of all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, 
i have never cared to speak to him. he knows nothing about it. 
he shall never know anything about it. but the world might guess it, 
and i will not bare my soul to their shallow prying eyes. 
my heart shall never be put under their microscope. there is too much 
of myself in the thing, harry-too much of myself!" 
"poets are not so scrupulous as you are. they know how useful passion 
is for publication. nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions." 
"i hate them for it," cried hallward. "an artist should create 
beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them. 
we live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a form 
of autobiography. we have lost the abstract sense of beauty. 
some day i will show the world what it is; and for that reason the world 
shall never see my portrait of dorian gray." 
"i think you are wrong, basil, but i won't argue with you. 
it is only the intellectually lost who ever argue. tell me, 
is dorian gray very fond of you?" 
the painter considered for a few moments. "he likes me," 
he answered after a pause; "i know he likes me. of course i 
flatter him dreadfully. i find a strange pleasure in saying 
things to him that i know i shall be sorry for having said. 
as a rule, he is charming to me, and we sit in the studio and talk 
of a thousand things. now and then, however, he is horribly 
thoughtless, and seems to take a real delight in giving me pain. 
then i feel, harry, that i have given away my whole soul to some 
one who treats it as if it were a flower to put in his coat, 
a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a 
summer's day." 
"days in summer, basil, are apt to linger," murmured lord henry. 
"perhaps you will tire sooner than he will. it is a sad thing to think of, 
but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty. that accounts 
for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate ourselves. 
in the wild struggle for existence, we want to have something that endures, 
and so we fill our minds with rubbish and facts, in the silly hope of keeping 
our place. the thoroughly well-informed man-that is the modern ideal. 
and the mind of the thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing. 
it is like a bric-a-brac shop, all monsters and dust, with everything 
priced above its proper value. i think you will tire first, all the same. 
some day you will look at your friend, and he will seem to you to be a little 
out of drawing, or you won't like his tone of colour, or something. you will 
bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and seriously think that he has 
behaved very badly to you. the next time he calls, you will be perfectly 
cold and indifferent. it will be a great pity, for it will alter you. 
what you have told me is quite a romance, a romance of art one might call it, 
and the worst of having a romance of any kind is that it leaves one 
so unromantic." 
"harry, don't talk like that. as long as i live, the personality 
of dorian gray will dominate me. you can't feel what i feel. 
you change too often." 
"ah, my dear basil, that is exactly why i can feel it. 
those who are faithful know only the trivial side of love: 
it is the faithless who know love's tragedies." and lord 
henry struck a light on a dainty silver case and began 
to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and satisfied air, 
as if he had summed up the world in a phrase. there was 
a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves 
of the ivy, and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves across 
the grass like swallows. how pleasant it was in the garden! 
and how delightful other people's emotions were!- 
much more delightful than their ideas, it seemed to him. 
one's own soul, and the passions of one's friends-those were 
the fascinating things in life. he pictured to himself 
with silent amusement the tedious luncheon that he had missed 
by staying so long with basil hallward. had he gone to his 
aunt's, he would have been sure to have met lord goodbody there, 
and the whole conversation would have been about the feeding 
of the poor and the necessity for model lodging-houses. each 
class would have preached the importance of those virtues, 
for whose exercise there was no necessity in their own lives. 
the rich would have spoken on the value of thrift, 
and the idle grown eloquent over the dignity of labour. 
it was charming to have escaped all that! as he thought of his aunt, 
an idea seemed to strike him. he turned to hallward and said, 
"my dear fellow, i have just remembered." 
"remembered what, harry?" 
"where i heard the name of dorian gray." 
"where was it?" asked hallward, with a slight frown. 
"don't look so angry, basil. it was at my aunt, lady agatha's. 
she told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going 
to help her in the east end, and that his name was dorian gray. 
i am bound to state that she never told me he was good-looking. women 
have no appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not. 
she said that he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature. 
i at once pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, 
horribly freckled, and tramping about on huge feet. i wish i had known it 
was your friend." 
"i am very glad you didn't, harry." 
"why?" 
"i don't want you to meet him." 
"you don't want me to meet him?" 
"no." 
"mr. dorian gray is in the studio, sir," said the butler, 
coming into the garden. 
"you must introduce me now," cried lord henry, laughing. 
the painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in the sunlight. 
"ask mr. gray to wait, parker: i shall be in in a few moments." 
the man bowed and went up the walk. 
then he looked at lord henry. "dorian gray is my dearest friend," 
he said. "he has a simple and a beautiful nature. your aunt 
was quite right in what she said of him. don't spoil him. 
don't try to influence him. your influence would be bad. 
the world is wide, and has many marvellous people in it. 
don't take away from me the one person who gives to my art 
whatever charm it possesses: my life as an artist depends 
on him. mind, harry, i trust you." he spoke very slowly, 
and the words seemed wrung out of him almost against 
his will. 
"what nonsense you talk!" said lord henry, smiling, and taking hallward 
by the arm, he almost led him into the house. 
chapter 2 
as they entered they saw dorian gray. he was seated at the piano, 
with his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of schumann's 
"forest scenes." "you must lend me these, basil," he cried. 
"i want to learn them. they are perfectly charming." 
"that entirely depends on how you sit to-day, dorian." 
"oh, i am tired of sitting, and i don't want a life-sized portrait 
of myself," answered the lad, swinging round on the music-stool 
in a wilful, petulant manner. when he caught sight of lord henry, 
a faint blush coloured his cheeks for a moment, and he started up. 
"i beg your pardon, basil, but i didn't know you had any one 
with you." 
"this is lord henry wotton, dorian, an old oxford friend of mine. 
i have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, 
and now you have spoiled everything." 
"you have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, mr. gray," 
said lord henry, stepping forward and extending his hand. 
"my aunt has often spoken to me about you. you are one of 
her favourites, and, i am afraid, one of her victims also." 
"i am in lady agatha's black books at present," answered dorian 
with a funny look of penitence. "i promised to go to a club in 
whitechapel with her last tuesday, and i really forgot all about it. 
we were to have played a duet together-three duets, i believe. 
i don't know what she will say to me. i am far too frightened 
to call." 
"oh, i will make your peace with my aunt. she is quite devoted to you. 
and i don't think it really matters about your not being there. the audience 
probably thought it was a duet. when aunt agatha sits down to the piano, 
she makes quite enough noise for two people." 
"that is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me," 
answered dorian, laughing. 
lord henry looked at him. yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome, 
with his finely curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his crisp 
gold hair. there was something in his face that made one trust him at once. 
all the candour of youth was there, as well as all youth's passionate purity. 
one felt that he had kept himself unspotted from the world. no wonder basil 
hallward worshipped him. 
"you are too charming to go in for philanthropy, mr. gray-far too charming." 
and lord henry flung himself down on the divan and opened his cigarette-case. 
the painter had been busy mixing his colours and getting his brushes ready. 
he was looking worried, and when he heard lord henry's last remark, he glanced 
at him, hesitated for a moment, and then said, "harry, i want to finish this 
picture to-day. would you think it awfully rude of me if i asked you to 
go away?" 
lord henry smiled and looked at dorian gray. "am i to go, mr. gray?" 
he asked. 
"oh, please don't, lord henry. i see that basil is in one of his sulky moods, 
and i can't bear him when he sulks. besides, i want you to tell me why i 
should not go in for philanthropy." 
"i don't know that i shall tell you that, mr. gray. it is so 
tedious a subject that one would have to talk seriously about it. 
but i certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop. 
you don't really mind, basil, do you? you have often told me that you 
liked your sitters to have some one to chat to." 
hallward bit his lip. "if dorian wishes it, of course you must stay. 
dorian's whims are laws to everybody, except himself." 
lord henry took up his hat and gloves. "you are very pressing, basil, but i 
am afraid i must go. i have promised to meet a man at the orleans. 
good-bye, mr. gray. come and see me some afternoon in curzon street. 
i am nearly always at home at five o'clock. write to me when you are coming. 
i should be sorry to miss you." 
"basil," cried dorian gray, "if lord henry wotton goes, i shall go, too. 
you never open your lips while you are painting, and it is horribly dull 
standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant. ask him to stay. 
i insist upon it." 
"stay, harry, to oblige dorian, and to oblige me," said hallward, 
gazing intently at his picture. "it is quite true, i never talk 
when i am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully 
tedious for my unfortunate sitters. i beg you to stay." 
"but what about my man at the orleans?" 
the painter laughed. "i don't think there will be any difficulty about that. 
sit down again, harry. and now, dorian, get up on the platform, and don't 
move about too much, or pay any attention to what lord henry says. 
he has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the single exception 
of myself." 
dorian gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young greek martyr, 
and made a little moue of discontent to lord henry, to whom he had rather 
taken a fancy. he was so unlike basil. they made a delightful contrast. 
and he had such a beautiful voice. after a few moments he said to him, 
"have you really a very bad influence, lord henry? as bad as basil says?" 
"there is no such thing as a good influence, mr. gray. 
all influence is immoral-immoral from the scientific point 
of view." 
"why?" 
"because to influence a person is to give him one's own soul. 
he does not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions. 
his virtues are not real to him. his sins, if there are such things 
as sins, are borrowed. he becomes an echo of some one else's music, 
an actor of a part that has not been written for him. the aim of life 
is self-development. to realize one's nature perfectly-that is what 
each of us is here for. people are afraid of themselves, nowadays. 
they have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes 
to one's self. of course, they are charitable. they feed the hungry 
and clothe the beggar. but their own souls starve, and are naked. 
courage has gone out of our race. perhaps we never really had it. 
the terror of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of god, 
which is the secret of religion-these are the two things that govern us. 
and yet-" 
"just turn your head a little more to the right, dorian, like a good boy," 
said the painter, deep in his work and conscious only that a look had come 
into the lad's face that he had never seen there before. 
"and yet," continued lord henry, in his low, musical voice, 
and with that graceful wave of the hand that was always so 
characteristic of him, and that he had even in his eton days, 
"i believe that if one man were to live out his life fully 
and completely, were to give form to every feeling, expression to 
every thought, reality to every dream-i believe that the world 
would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we would forget all 
the maladies of mediaevalism, and return to the hellenic ideal- 
to something finer, richer than the hellenic ideal, it may be. 
but the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself. 
the mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the 
self-denial that mars our lives. we are punished for our refusals. 
every impulse that we strive to strangle broods in the mind 
and poisons us. the body sins once, and has done with its sin, 
for action is a mode of purification. nothing remains then 
but the recollection of a pleasure, or the luxury of a regret. 
the only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it. 
resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for the things 
it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its monstrous 
laws have made monstrous and unlawful. it has been said 
that the great events of the world take place in the brain. 
it is in the brain, and the brain only, that the great sins 
of the world take place also. you, mr. gray, you yourself, 
with your rose-red youth and your rose-white boyhood, you have had 
passions that have made you afraid, thoughts that have filled you 
with terror, day-dreams and sleeping dreams whose mere memory might 
stain your cheek with shame-" 
"stop!" faltered dorian gray, "stop! you bewilder me. 
i don't know what to say. there is some answer to you, but i 
cannot find it. don't speak. let me think. or, rather, let me 
try not to think." 
for nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted 
lips and eyes strangely bright. he was dimly conscious 
that entirely fresh influences were at work within him. 
yet they seemed to him to have come really from himself. 
the few words that basil's friend had said to him-words spoken 
by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in them- 
had touched some secret chord that had never been touched before, 
but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to 
curious pulses. 
music had stirred him like that. music had troubled him many times. 
but music was not articulate. it was not a new world, but rather 
another chaos, that it created in us. words! mere words! 
how terrible they were! how clear, and vivid, and cruel! one could 
not escape from them. and yet what a subtle magic there was in them! 
they seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, 
and to have a music of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute. 
mere words! was there anything so real as words? 
yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not understood. 
he understood them now. life suddenly became fiery-coloured to him. 
it seemed to him that he had been walking in fire. why had he not 
known it? 
with his subtle smile, lord henry watched him. he knew the precise 
psychological moment when to say nothing. he felt intensely interested. 
he was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had produced, 
and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen, 
a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, 
he wondered whether dorian gray was passing through a similar experience. 
he had merely shot an arrow into the air. had it hit the mark? 
how fascinating the lad was! 
hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, 
that had the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, 
at any rate comes only from strength. he was unconscious of 
the silence. 
"basil, i am tired of standing," cried dorian gray suddenly. 
"i must go out and sit in the garden. the air is stifling here." 
"my dear fellow, i am so sorry. when i am painting, 
i can't think of anything else. but you never sat better. 
you were perfectly still. and i have caught the effect i wanted- 
the half-parted lips and the bright look in the eyes. 
i don't know what harry has been saying to you, but he has 
certainly made you have the most wonderful expression. 
i suppose he has been paying you compliments. you mustn't believe 
a word that he says." 
"he has certainly not been paying me compliments. perhaps that is the reason 
that i don't believe anything he has told me." 
"you know you believe it all," said lord henry, looking at him with 
his dreamy languorous eyes. "i will go out to the garden with you. 
it is horribly hot in the studio. basil, let us have something iced 
to drink, something with strawberries in it." 
"certainly, harry. just touch the bell, and when parker comes i 
will tell him what you want. i have got to work up this background, 
so i will join you later on. don't keep dorian too long. 
i have never been in better form for painting than i am to-day. this 
is going to be my masterpiece. it is my masterpiece as it stands." 
lord henry went out to the garden and found dorian gray burying his face in 
the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their perfume as if it 
had been wine. he came close to him and put his hand upon his shoulder. 
"you are quite right to do that," he murmured. "nothing can cure the soul 
but the senses, just as nothing can cure the senses but the soul." 
the lad started and drew back. he was bareheaded, and the leaves 
had tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads. 
there was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they 
are suddenly awakened. his finely chiselled nostrils quivered, 
and some hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left 
them trembling. 
"yes," continued lord henry, "that is one of the great secrets of life- 
to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul. 
you are a wonderful creation. you know more than you think you know, just as 
you know less than you want to know." 
dorian gray frowned and turned his head away. he could not help 
liking the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him. 
his romantic, olive-coloured face and worn expression interested him. 
there was something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascinating. 
his cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm. 
they moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language 
of their own. but he felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid. 
why had it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself? 
he had known basil hallward for months, but the friendship between them 
had never altered him. suddenly there had come some one across his life 
who seemed to have disclosed to him life's mystery. and, yet, what was 
there to be afraid of? he was not a schoolboy or a girl. it was absurd to 
be frightened. 
"let us go and sit in the shade," said lord henry. "parker has 
brought out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, 
you will be quite spoiled, and basil will never paint you again. 
you really must not allow yourself to become sunburnt. it would 
be unbecoming." 
"what can it matter?" cried dorian gray, laughing, as he sat 
down on the seat at the end of the garden. 
"it should matter everything to you, mr. gray." 
"why?" 
"because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing 
worth having." 
"i don't feel that, lord henry." 
"no, you don't feel it now. some day, when you are old 
and wrinkled and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead 
with its lines, and passion branded your lips with its 
hideous fires, you will feel it, you will feel it terribly. 
now, wherever you go, you charm the world. will it always 
be so? . . . you have a wonderfully beautiful face, mr. gray. 
don't frown. you have. and beauty is a form of genius- 
is higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation. 
it is of the great facts of the world, like sunlight, 
or spring-time, or the reflection in dark waters of that silver 
shell we call the moon. it cannot be questioned. it has its divine 
right of sovereignty. it makes princes of those who have it. 
you smile? ah! when you have lost it you won't smile. 
. . . people say sometimes that beauty is only superficial. 
that may be so, but at least it is not so superficial 
as thought is. to me, beauty is the wonder of wonders. 
it is only shallow people who do not judge by appearances. 
the true mystery of the world is the visible, not the invisible. 
. . . yes, mr. gray, the gods have been good to you. 
but what the gods give they quickly take away. you have only 
a few years in which to live really, perfectly, and fully. 
when your youth goes, your beauty will go with it, and then you 
will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, 
or have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that 
the memory of your past will make more bitter than defeats. 
every month as it wanes brings you nearer to something dreadful. 
time is jealous of you, and wars against your lilies and your roses. 
you will become sallow, and hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed. 
you will suffer horribly.... ah! realize your youth 
while you have it. don't squander the gold of your days, 
listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure, 
or giving away your life to the ignorant, the common, 
and the vulgar. these are the sickly aims, the false ideals, 
of our age. live! live the wonderful life that is in you! 
let nothing be lost upon you. be always searching for 
new sensations. be afraid of nothing. . . . a new hedonism- 
that is what our century wants. you might be its visible symbol. 
with your personality there is nothing you could not do. 
the world belongs to you for a season. . . . the moment i met 
you i saw that you were quite unconscious of what you really are, 
of what you really might be. there was so much in you that 
charmed me that i felt i must tell you something about yourself. 
i thought how tragic it would be if you were wasted. for there is 
such a little time that your youth will last-such a little time. 
the common hill-flowers wither, but they blossom again. 
the laburnum will be as yellow next june as it is now. 
in a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year 
after year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars. 
but we never get back our youth. the pulse of joy that beats in us 
at twenty becomes sluggish. our limbs fail, our senses rot. 
we degenerate into hideous puppets, haunted by the memory 
of the passions of which we were too much afraid, and the 
exquisite temptations that we had not the courage to yield to. 
youth! youth! there is absolutely nothing in the world but 
youth!" 
dorian gray listened, open-eyed and wondering. the spray 
of lilac fell from his hand upon the gravel. a furry bee came 
and buzzed round it for a moment. then it began to scramble 
all over the oval stellated globe of the tiny blossoms. 
he watched it with that strange interest in trivial things 
that we try to develop when things of high import make us afraid, 
or when we are stirred by some new emotion for which we 
cannot find expression, or when some thought that terrifies 
us lays sudden siege to the brain and calls on us to yield. 
after a time the bee flew away. he saw it creeping into the stained 
trumpet of a tyrian convolvulus. the flower seemed to quiver, 
and then swayed gently to and fro. 
suddenly the painter appeared at the door of the studio and made staccato 
signs for them to come in. they turned to each other and smiled. 
"i am waiting," he cried. "do come in. the light is quite perfect, 
and you can bring your drinks." 
they rose up and sauntered down the walk together. two green-and-white 
butterflies fluttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the corner 
of the garden a thrush began to sing. 
"you are glad you have met me, mr. gray," said lord henry, 
looking at him. 
"yes, i am glad now. i wonder shall i always be glad?" 
"always! that is a dreadful word. it makes me shudder when i hear it. 
women are so fond of using it. they spoil every romance by trying to make 
it last for ever. it is a meaningless word, too. the only difference 
between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice lasts a 
little longer." 
as they entered the studio, dorian gray put his hand upon lord henry's arm. 
"in that case, let our friendship be a caprice," he murmured, flushing at his 
own boldness, then stepped up on the platform and resumed his pose. 
lord henry flung himself into a large wicker arm-chair and watched him. 
the sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound 
that broke the stillness, except when, now and then, hallward stepped 
back to look at his work from a distance. in the slanting beams 
that streamed through the open doorway the dust danced and was golden. 
the heavy scent of the roses seemed to brood over everything. 
after about a quarter of an hour hallward stopped painting, 
looked for a long time at dorian gray, and then for a long 
time at the picture, biting the end of one of his huge brushes 
and frowning. "it is quite finished," he cried at last, 
and stooping down he wrote his name in long vermilion letters on 
the left-hand corner of the canvas. 
lord henry came over and examined the picture. it was certainly 
a wonderful work of art, and a wonderful likeness as well. 
"my dear fellow, i congratulate you most warmly," he said. 
"it is the finest portrait of modern times. mr. gray, come over 
and look at yourself." 
the lad started, as if awakened from some dream. 
"is it really finished?" he murmured, stepping down from the platform. 
"quite finished," said the painter. "and you have sat splendidly 
to-day. i am awfully obliged to you." 
"that is entirely due to me," broke in lord henry. "isn't it, 
mr. gray?" 
dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his 
picture and turned towards it. when he saw it he drew back, 
and his cheeks flushed for a moment with pleasure. a look of joy came 
into his eyes, as if he had recognized himself for the first time. 
he stood there motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that hallward 
was speaking to him, but not catching the meaning of his words. 
the sense of his own beauty came on him like a revelation. 
he had never felt it before. basil hallward's compliments had seemed 
to him to be merely the charming exaggeration of friendship. 
he had listened to them, laughed at them, forgotten them. 
they had not influenced his nature. then had come lord henry 
wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his terrible warning 
of its brevity. that had stirred him at the time, and now, 
as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full 
reality of the description flashed across him. yes, there would 
be a day when his face would be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim 
and colourless, the grace of his figure broken and deformed. 
the scarlet would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from 
his hair. the life that was to make his soul would mar his body. 
he would become dreadful, hideous, and uncouth. 
as he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him 
like a knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver. 
his eyes deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist 
of tears. he felt as if a hand of ice had been laid upon 
his heart. 
"don't you like it?" cried hallward at last, stung a little 
by the lad's silence, not understanding what it meant. 
"of course he likes it," said lord henry. "who wouldn't like it? 
it is one of the greatest things in modern art. i will give you 
anything you like to ask for it. i must have it." 
"it is not my property, harry." 
"whose property is it?" 
"dorian's, of course," answered the painter. 
"he is a very lucky fellow." 
"how sad it is!" murmured dorian gray with his eyes still fixed upon 
his own portrait. "how sad it is! i shall grow old, and horrible, 
and dreadful. but this picture will remain always young. 
it will never be older than this particular day of june. 
. . . if it were only the other way! if it were i who was 
to be always young, and the picture that was to grow old! 
for that-for that-i would give everything! yes, there is 
nothing in the whole world i would not give! i would give my soul 
for that!" 
"you would hardly care for such an arrangement, basil," cried lord 
henry, laughing. "it would be rather hard lines on your work." 
"i should object very strongly, harry," said hallward. 
dorian gray turned and looked at him. "i believe you would, basil. 
you like your art better than your friends. i am no more to you 
than a green bronze figure. hardly as much, i dare say." 
the painter stared in amazement. it was so unlike dorian to speak like that. 
what had happened? he seemed quite angry. his face was flushed and his 
cheeks burning. 
"yes," he continued, "i am less to you than your ivory hermes or your 
silver faun. you will like them always. how long will you like me? 
till i have my first wrinkle, i suppose. i know, now, that when one 
loses one's good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything. 
your picture has taught me that. lord henry wotton is perfectly right. 
youth is the only thing worth having. when i find that i am growing old, i 
shall kill myself." 
hallward turned pale and caught his hand. "dorian! dorian!" he cried, 
"don't talk like that. i have never had such a friend as you, and i shall 
never have such another. you are not jealous of material things, are you?- 
you who are finer than any of them!" 
"i am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die. 
i am jealous of the portrait you have painted of me. 
why should it keep what i must lose? every moment that passes 
takes something from me and gives something to it. oh, if it 
were only the other way! if the picture could change, 
and i could be always what i am now! why did you paint it? 
it will mock me some day-mock me horribly!" the hot tears 
welled into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself 
on the divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he 
was praying. 
"this is your doing, harry," said the painter bitterly. 
lord henry shrugged his shoulders. "it is the real dorian gray- 
that is all." 
"it is not." 
"if it is not, what have i to do with it?" 
"you should have gone away when i asked you," he muttered. 
"i stayed when you asked me," was lord henry's answer. 
"harry, i can't quarrel with my two best friends at once, 
but between you both you have made me hate the finest 
piece of work i have ever done, and i will destroy it. 
what is it but canvas and colour? i will not let it come across 
our three lives and mar them." 
dorian gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with pallid face and 
tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal painting-table 
that was set beneath the high curtained window. what was he doing there? 
his fingers were straying about among the litter of tin tubes and dry brushes, 
seeking for something. yes, it was for the long palette-knife, with its thin 
blade of lithe steel. he had found it at last. he was going to rip up 
the canvas. 
with a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over 
to hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end 
of the studio. "don't, basil, don't!" he cried. "it would be murder!" 
"i am glad you appreciate my work at last, dorian," said the painter coldly 
when he had recovered from his surprise. "i never thought you would." 
"appreciate it? i am in love with it, basil. it is part of myself. 
i feel that." 
"well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, 
and sent home. then you can do what you like with yourself." 
and he walked across the room and rang the bell for tea. 
"you will have tea, of course, dorian? and so will you, harry? 
or do you object to such simple pleasures?" 
"i adore simple pleasures," said lord henry. "they are 
the last refuge of the complex. but i don't like scenes, 
except on the stage. what absurd fellows you are, both of you! 
i wonder who it was defined man as a rational animal. 
it was the most premature definition ever given. man is many things, 
but he is not rational. i am glad he is not, after all- 
though i wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture. 
you had much better let me have it, basil. this silly boy doesn't 
really want it, and i really do." 
"if you let any one have it but me, basil, i shall never forgive you!" 
cried dorian gray; "and i don't allow people to call me a silly boy." 
"you know the picture is yours, dorian. i gave it to you before it existed." 
"and you know you have been a little silly, mr. gray, and that you 
don't really object to being reminded that you are extremely young." 
"i should have objected very strongly this morning, lord henry." 
"ah! this morning! you have lived since then." 
there came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a 
laden tea-tray and set it down upon a small japanese table. 
there was a rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted 
georgian urn. two globe-shaped china dishes were brought 
in by a page. dorian gray went over and poured out the tea. 
the two men sauntered languidly to the table and examined what was 
under the covers. 
"let us go to the theatre to-night," said lord henry. 
"there is sure to be something on, somewhere. i have promised 
to dine at white's, but it is only with an old friend, 
so i can send him a wire to say that i am ill, or that i am 
prevented from coming in consequence of a subsequent engagement. 
i think that would be a rather nice excuse: it would have all 
the surprise of candour." 
"it is such a bore putting on one's dress-clothes," muttered hallward. 
"and, when one has them on, they are so horrid." 
"yes," answered lord henry dreamily, "the costume of the nineteenth 
century is detestable. it is so sombre, so depressing. sin is the only 
real colour-element left in modern life." 
"you really must not say things like that before dorian, harry." 
"before which dorian? the one who is pouring out tea for us, 
or the one in the picture?" 
"before either." 
"i should like to come to the theatre with you, lord henry," 
said the lad. 
"then you shall come; and you will come, too, basil, won't you?" 
"i can't, really. i would sooner not. i have a lot of work to do." 
"well, then, you and i will go alone, mr. gray." 
"i should like that awfully." 
the painter bit his lip and walked over, cup in hand, to the picture. 
"i shall stay with the real dorian," he said, sadly. 
"is it the real dorian?" cried the original of the portrait, 
strolling across to him. "am i really like that?" 
"yes; you are just like that." 
"how wonderful, basil!" 
"at least you are like it in appearance. but it will never alter," 
sighed hallward. "that is something." 
"what a fuss people make about fidelity!" exclaimed lord henry. 
"why, even in love it is purely a question for physiology. 
it has nothing to do with our own will. young men want to 
be faithful, and are not; old men want to be faithless, and cannot: 
that is all one can say." 
"don't go to the theatre to-night, dorian," said hallward. 
"stop and dine with me." 
"i can't, basil." 
"why?" 
"because i have promised lord henry wotton to go with him." 
"he won't like you the better for keeping your promises. 
he always breaks his own. i beg you not to go." 
dorian gray laughed and shook his head. 
"i entreat you." 
the lad hesitated, and looked over at lord henry, who was watching 
them from the tea-table with an amused smile. 
"i must go, basil," he answered. 
"very well," said hallward, and he went over and laid down his 
cup on the tray. "it is rather late, and, as you have to dress, 
you had better lose no time. good-bye, harry. good-bye, dorian. 
come and see me soon. come to-morrow." 
"certainly." 
"you won't forget?" 
"no, of course not," cried dorian. 
"and ... harry!" 
"yes, basil?" 
"remember what i asked you, when we were in the garden this morning." 
"i have forgotten it." 
"i trust you." 
"i wish i could trust myself," said lord henry, laughing. "come, mr. gray, 
my hansom is outside, and i can drop you at your own place. good-bye, basil. 
it has been a most interesting afternoon." 
as the door closed behind them, the painter flung himself down on a sofa, 
and a look of pain came into his face. 
chapter 3 
at half-past twelve next day lord henry wotton strolled from curzon 
street over to the albany to call on his uncle, lord fermor, 
a genial if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside 
world called selfish because it derived no particular benefit 
from him, but who was considered generous by society as he fed 
the people who amused him. his father had been our ambassador 
at madrid when isabella was young and prim unthought of, 
but had retired from the diplomatic service in a capricious 
moment of annoyance on not being offered the embassy at paris, 
a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled 
by reason of his birth, his indolence, the good english 
of his dispatches, and his inordinate passion for pleasure. 
the son, who had been his father's secretary, had resigned along 
with his chief, somewhat foolishly as was thought at the time, 
and on succeeding some months later to the title, had set 
himself to the serious study of the great aristocratic art 
of doing absolutely nothing. he had two large town houses, 
but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, 
and took most of his meals at his club. he paid some attention 
to the management of his collieries in the midland counties, 
excusing himself for this taint of industry on the ground that 
the one advantage of having coal was that it enabled a gentleman 
to afford the decency of burning wood on his own hearth. 
in politics he was a tory, except when the tories were in office, 
during which period he roundly abused them for being a pack 
of radicals. he was a hero to his valet, who bullied him, 
and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn. 
only england could have produced him, and he always said 
that the country was going to the dogs. his principles 
were out of date, but there was a good deal to be said for 
his prejudices. 
when lord henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough 
shooting-coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over the times. 
"well, harry," said the old gentleman, "what brings you out so early? 
i thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible 
till five." 
"pure family affection, i assure you, uncle george. i want to get 
something out of you." 
"money, i suppose," said lord fermor, making a wry face. 
"well, sit down and tell me all about it. young people, 
nowadays, imagine that money is everything." 
"yes," murmured lord henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; 
"and when they grow older they know it. but i don't want money. 
it is only people who pay their bills who want that, uncle george, 
and i never pay mine. credit is the capital of a younger son, 
and one lives charmingly upon it. besides, i always deal with 
dartmoor's tradesmen, and consequently they never bother me. 
what i want is information: not useful information, of course; 
useless information." 
"well, i can tell you anything that is in an english blue book, 
harry, although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense. 
when i was in the diplomatic, things were much better. 
but i hear they let them in now by examination. what can 
you expect? examinations, sir, are pure humbug from beginning 
to end. if a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, 
and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad 
for him." 
"mr. dorian gray does not belong to blue books, uncle george," 
said lord henry languidly. 
"mr. dorian gray? who is he?" asked lord fermor, knitting his bushy 
white eyebrows. 
"that is what i have come to learn, uncle george. or rather, 
i know who he is. he is the last lord kelso's grandson. 
his mother was a devereux, lady margaret devereaux. 
i want you to tell me about his mother. what was she like? 
whom did she marry? you have known nearly everybody 
in your time, so you might have known her. i am very much 
interested in mr. gray at present. i have only just 
met him." 
"kelso's grandson!" echoed the old gentleman. "kelso's grandson! ... of 
course.... i knew his mother intimately. i believe i was at her christening. 
she was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, margaret devereux, and made 
all the men frantic by running away with a penniless young fellow- 
a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or something 
of that kind. certainly. i remember the whole thing as if it 
happened yesterday. the poor chap was killed in a duel at spa a few 
months after the marriage. there was an ugly story about it. 
they said kelso got some rascally adventurer, some belgian brute, 
to insult his son-in-law in public-paid him, sir, to do it, paid him- 
and that the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon. 
the thing was hushed up, but, egad, kelso ate his chop alone at the club 
for some time afterwards. he brought his daughter back with him, i was told, 
and she never spoke to him again. oh, yes; it was a bad business. 
the girl died, too, died within a year. so she left a son, did she? 
i had forgotten that. what sort of boy is he? if he is like his mother, 
he must be a good-looking chap." 
"he is very good-looking," assented lord henry. 
"i hope he will fall into proper hands," continued the old man. 
"he should have a pot of money waiting for him if kelso 
did the right thing by him. his mother had money, too. 
all the selby property came to her, through her grandfather. 
her grandfather hated kelso, thought him a mean dog. 
he was, too. came to madrid once when i was there. egad, i was 
ashamed of him. the queen used to ask me about the english noble 
who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares. 
they made quite a story of it. i didn't dare show my face at court 
for a month. i hope he treated his grandson better than he did 
the jarvies." 
"i don't know," answered lord henry. "i fancy that the boy will be well off. 
he is not of age yet. he has selby, i know. he told me so. and . . . his 
mother was very beautiful?" 
"margaret devereux was one of the loveliest creatures i ever saw, harry. 
what on earth induced her to behave as she did, i never could understand. 
she could have married anybody she chose. carlington was mad after her. 
she was romantic, though. all the women of that family were. 
the men were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful. 
carlington went on his knees to her. told me so himself. she laughed at him, 
and there wasn't a girl in london at the time who wasn't after him. 
and by the way, harry, talking about silly marriages, what is this humbug your 
father tells me about dartmoor wanting to marry an american? ain't english 
girls good enough for him?" 
"it is rather fashionable to marry americans just now, uncle george." 
"i'll back english women against the world, harry," said lord fermor, 
striking the table with his fist. 
"the betting is on the americans." 
"they don't last, i am told," muttered his uncle. 
"a long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a steeplechase. 
they take things flying. i don't think dartmoor has a chance." 
"who are her people?" grumbled the old gentleman. "has she got any?" 
lord henry shook his head. "american girls are as clever at concealing 
their parents, as english women are at concealing their past," he said, 
rising to go. 
"they are pork-packers, i suppose?" 
"i hope so, uncle george, for dartmoor's sake. i am told 
that pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in america, 
after politics." 
"is she pretty?" 
"she behaves as if she was beautiful. most american women do. 
it is the secret of their charm." 
"why can't these american women stay in their own country? 
they are always telling us that it is the paradise for women." 
"it is. that is the reason why, like eve, they are so excessively 
anxious to get out of it," said lord henry. "good-bye, uncle george. 
i shall be late for lunch, if i stop any longer. thanks for giving me 
the information i wanted. i always like to know everything about my 
new friends, and nothing about my old ones." 
"where are you lunching, harry?" 
"at aunt agatha's. i have asked myself and mr. gray. 
he is her latest protege." 
"humph! tell your aunt agatha, harry, not to bother me any more with 
her charity appeals. i am sick of them. why, the good woman thinks 
that i have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads." 
"all right, uncle george, i'll tell her, but it won't have any effect. 
philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity. it is their 
distinguishing characteristic." 
the old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for his servant. 
lord henry passed up the low arcade into burlington street and turned his 
steps in the direction of berkeley square. 
so that was the story of dorian gray's parentage. 
crudely as it had been told to him, it had yet stirred him 
by its suggestion of a strange, almost modern romance. 
a beautiful woman risking everything for a mad passion. 
a few wild weeks of happiness cut short by a hideous, 
treacherous crime. months of voiceless agony, and then 
a child born in pain. the mother snatched away by death, 
the boy left to solitude and the tyranny of an old and 
loveless man. yes; it was an interesting background. 
it posed the lad, made him more perfect, as it were. behind every 
exquisite thing that existed, there was something tragic. 
worlds had to be in travail, that the meanest flower might blow. 
. . . and how charming he had been at dinner the night before, 
as with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure 
he had sat opposite to him at the club, the red candleshades 
staining to a richer rose the wakening wonder of his face. 
talking to him was like playing upon an exquisite violin. 
he answered to every touch and thrill of the bow. . . . there 
was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of influence. 
no other activity was like it. to project one's soul into some 
gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one's 
own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added 
music of passion and youth; to convey one's temperament into 
another as though it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: 
there was a real joy in that-perhaps the most satisfying 
joy left to us in an age so limited and vulgar as our own, 
an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and grossly common 
in its aims.... he was a marvellous type, too, this lad, 
whom by so curious a chance he had met in basil's studio, 
or could be fashioned into a marvellous type, at any rate. 
grace was his, and the white purity of boyhood, and beauty such 
as old greek marbles kept for us. there was nothing that one 
could not do with him. he could be made a titan or a toy. 
what a pity it was that such beauty was destined to fade! 
. . . and basil? from a psychological point of view, 
how interesting he was! the new manner in art, the fresh 
mode of looking at life, suggested so strangely by the merely 
visible presence of one who was unconscious of it all; 
the silent spirit that dwelt in dim woodland, and walked unseen 
in open field, suddenly showing herself, dryadlike and not afraid, 
because in his soul who sought for her there had been wakened 
that wonderful vision to which alone are wonderful things revealed; 
the mere shapes and patterns of things becoming, as it were, 
refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value, as though 
they were themselves patterns of some other and more perfect 
form whose shadow they made real: how strange it all was! 
he remembered something like it in history. was it not plato, 
that artist in thought, who had first analyzed it? 
was it not buonarotti who had carved it in the coloured marbles 
of a sonnet-sequence? but in our own century it was strange. 
. . . yes; he would try to be to dorian gray what, without knowing it, 
the lad was to the painter who had fashioned the wonderful portrait. 
he would seek to dominate him-had already, indeed, 
half done so. he would make that wonderful spirit his own. 
there was something fascinating in this son of love and 
death. 
suddenly he stopped and glanced up at the houses. he found that he had 
passed his aunt's some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back. 
when he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they 
had gone in to lunch. he gave one of the footmen his hat and stick 
and passed into the dining-room. 
"late as usual, harry," cried his aunt, shaking her head at him. 
he invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat 
next to her, looked round to see who was there. dorian bowed 
to him shyly from the end of the table, a flush of pleasure 
stealing into his cheek. opposite was the duchess of harley, 
a lady of admirable good-nature and good temper, much liked 
by every one who knew her, and of those ample architectural 
proportions that in women who are not duchesses are described 
by contemporary historians as stoutness. next to her sat, 
on her right, sir thomas burdon, a radical member of parliament, 
who followed his leader in public life and in private life 
followed the best cooks, dining with the tories and thinking 
with the liberals, in accordance with a wise and well-known rule. 
the post on her left was occupied by mr. erskine of treadley, 
an old gentleman of considerable charm and culture, who had fallen, 
however, into bad habits of silence, having, as he explained 
once to lady agatha, said everything that he had to say 
before he was thirty. his own neighbour was mrs. vandeleur, 
one of his aunt's oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, 
but so dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly 
bound hymn-book. fortunately for him she had on the other 
side lord faudel, a most intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, 
as bald as a ministerial statement in the house of commons, 
with whom she was conversing in that intensely earnest manner 
which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once himself, 
that all really good people fall into, and from which none of them 
ever quite escape. 
"we are talking about poor dartmoor, lord henry," cried the duchess, 
nodding pleasantly to him across the table. "do you think he will really 
marry this fascinating young person?" 
"i believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, duchess." 
"how dreadful!" exclaimed lady agatha. "really, some one should interfere." 
"i am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an american 
dry-goods store," said sir thomas burdon, looking supercilious. 
"my uncle has already suggested pork-packing sir thomas." 
"dry-goods! what are american dry-goods?" asked the duchess, 
raising her large hands in wonder and accentuating the verb. 
"american novels," answered lord henry, helping himself to some quail. 
the duchess looked puzzled. 
"don't mind him, my dear," whispered lady agatha. "he never means anything 
that he says." 
"when america was discovered," said the radical member- 
and he began to give some wearisome facts. like all people 
who try to exhaust a subject, he exhausted his listeners. 
the duchess sighed and exercised her privilege of interruption. 
"i wish to goodness it never had been discovered at all!" 
she exclaimed. "really, our girls have no chance nowadays. it is 
most unfair." 
"perhaps, after all, america never has been discovered," 
said mr. erskine; "i myself would say that it had merely 
been detected." 
"oh! but i have seen specimens of the inhabitants," answered the 
duchess vaguely. "i must confess that most of them are extremely pretty. 
and they dress well, too. they get all their dresses in paris. 
i wish i could afford to do the same." 
"they say that when good americans die they go to paris," 
chuckled sir thomas, who had a large wardrobe of humour's 
cast-off clothes. 
"really! and where do bad americans go to when they die?" 
inquired the duchess. 
"they go to america," murmured lord henry. 
sir thomas frowned. "i am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced against 
that great country," he said to lady agatha. "i have travelled all over it 
in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters, are extremely civil. 
i assure you that it is an education to visit it." 
"but must we really see chicago in order to be educated?" 
asked mr. erskine plaintively. "i don't feel up to the journey." 
sir thomas waved his hand. "mr. erskine of treadley has the world on 
his shelves. we practical men like to see things, not to read about 
them. the americans are an extremely interesting people. they are 
absolutely reasonable. i think that is their distinguishing 
characteristic. yes, mr. erskine, an absolutely reasonable people. i 
assure you there is no nonsense about the americans." 
"how dreadful!" cried lord henry. "i can stand brute force, but brute 
reason is quite unbearable. there is something unfair about its use. 
it is hitting below the intellect." 
"i do not understand you," said sir thomas, growing rather red. 
"i do, lord henry," murmured mr. erskine, with a smile. 
"paradoxes are all very well in their way... ." rejoined the baronet. 
"was that a paradox?" asked mr. erskine. "i did not think so. 
perhaps it was. well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth. 
to test reality we must see it on the tight rope. when the verities 
become acrobats, we can judge them." 
"dear me!" said lady agatha, "how you men argue! i am sure i never can make 
out what you are talking about. oh! harry, i am quite vexed with you. 
why do you try to persuade our nice mr. dorian gray to give up the east end? 
i assure you he would be quite invaluable. they would love his playing." 
"i want him to play to me," cried lord henry, smiling, and he looked 
down the table and caught a bright answering glance. 
"but they are so unhappy in whitechapel," continued lady agatha. 
"i can sympathize with everything except suffering," 
said lord henry, shrugging his shoulders. "i cannot sympathize 
with that. it is too ugly, too horrible, too distressing. 
there is something terribly morbid in the modern sympathy 
with pain. one should sympathize with the colour, the beauty, 
the joy of life. the less said about life's sores, 
the better." 
"still, the east end is a very important problem," remarked sir thomas 
with a grave shake of the head. 
"quite so," answered the young lord. "it is the problem of slavery, 
and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves." 
the politician looked at him keenly. "what change do you propose, then?" 
he asked. 
lord henry laughed. "i don't desire to change anything in england 
except the weather," he answered. "i am quite content with 
philosophic contemplation. but, as the nineteenth century has 
gone bankrupt through an over-expenditure of sympathy, i would 
suggest that we should appeal to science to put us straight. 
the advantage of the emotions is that they lead us astray, 
and the advantage of science is that it is not emotional." 
"but we have such grave responsibilities," ventured mrs. vandeleur timidly. 
"terribly grave," echoed lady agatha. 
lord henry looked over at mr. erskine. "humanity takes itself too seriously. 
it is the world's original sin. if the caveman had known how to laugh, 
history would have been different." 
"you are really very comforting," warbled the duchess. 
"i have always felt rather guilty when i came to see your 
dear aunt, for i take no interest at all in the east end. 
for the future i shall be able to look her in the face without 
a blush." 
"a blush is very becoming, duchess," remarked lord henry. 
"only when one is young," she answered. "when an old woman 
like myself blushes, it is a very bad sign. ah! lord henry, 
i wish you would tell me how to become young again." 
he thought for a moment. "can you remember any great error 
that you committed in your early days, duchess?" he asked, 
looking at her across the table. 
"a great many, i fear," she cried. 
"then commit them over again," he said gravely. "to get back one's youth, 
one has merely to repeat one's follies." 
"a delightful theory!" she exclaimed. "i must put it into practice." 
"a dangerous theory!" came from sir thomas's tight lips. 
lady agatha shook her head, but could not help being amused. 
mr. erskine listened. 
"yes," he continued, "that is one of the great secrets of life. 
nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, 
and discover when it is too late that the only things one never 
regrets are one's mistakes." 
a laugh ran round the table. 
he played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into 
the air and transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; 
made it iridescent with fancy and winged it with paradox. 
the praise of folly, as he went on, soared into a philosophy, 
and philosophy herself became young, and catching the mad 
music of pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, her wine-stained 
robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a bacchante over the hills 
of life, and mocked the slow silenus for being sober. 
facts fled before her like frightened forest things. 
her white feet trod the huge press at which wise omar sits, 
till the seething grape-juice rose round her bare limbs in waves 
of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over the vat's black, 
dripping, sloping sides. it was an extraordinary improvisation. 
he felt that the eyes of dorian gray were fixed on him, 
and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was 
one whose temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give 
his wit keenness and to lend colour to his imagination. 
he was brilliant, fantastic, irresponsible. he charmed 
his listeners out of themselves, and they followed 
his pipe, laughing. dorian gray never took his gaze 
off him, but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing 
each other over his lips and wonder growing grave in his 
darkening eyes. 
at last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room in 
the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was waiting. 
she wrung her hands in mock despair. "how annoying!" she cried. "i must go. 
i have to call for my husband at the club, to take him to some absurd meeting 
at willis's rooms, where he is going to be in the chair. if i am late he is 
sure to be furious, and i couldn't have a scene in this bonnet. it is far 
too fragile. a harsh word would ruin it. no, i must go, dear agatha. 
good-bye, lord henry, you are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing. 
i am sure i don't know what to say about your views. you must come and dine 
with us some night. tuesday? are you disengaged tuesday?" 
"for you i would throw over anybody, duchess," said lord henry with a bow. 
"ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you," she cried; "so mind you come"; 
and she swept out of the room, followed by lady agatha and the other ladies. 
when lord henry had sat down again, mr. erskine moved round, 
and taking a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm. 
"you talk books away," he said; "why don't you write one?" 
"i am too fond of reading books to care to write them, mr. erskine. 
i should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely 
as a persian carpet and as unreal. but there is no literary public 
in england for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias. 
of all people in the world the english have the least sense of the beauty 
of literature." 
"i fear you are right," answered mr. erskine. "i myself used 
to have literary ambitions, but i gave them up long ago. 
and now, my dear young friend, if you will allow me to call 
you so, may i ask if you really meant all that you said to us 
at lunch?" 
"i quite forget what i said," smiled lord henry. "was it all very bad?" 
"very bad indeed. in fact i consider you extremely dangerous, 
and if anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you 
as being primarily responsible. but i should like to talk to you 
about life. the generation into which i was born was tedious. 
some day, when you are tired of london, come down to treadley and expound 
to me your philosophy of pleasure over some admirable burgundy i am 
fortunate enough to possess." 
"i shall be charmed. a visit to treadley would be a great privilege. 
it has a perfect host, and a perfect library." 
"you will complete it," answered the old gentleman with a courteous bow. 
"and now i must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt. i am due at 
the athenaeum. it is the hour when we sleep there." 
"all of you, mr. erskine?" 
"forty of us, in forty arm-chairs. we are practising for an english academy 
of letters." 
lord henry laughed and rose. "i am going to the park," 
he cried. 
as he was passing out of the door, dorian gray touched him on the arm. 
"let me come with you," he murmured. 
"but i thought you had promised basil hallward to go and see him," 
answered lord henry. 
"i would sooner come with you; yes, i feel i must come with you. 
do let me. and you will promise to talk to me all the time? 
no one talks so wonderfully as you do." 
"ah! i have talked quite enough for to-day," said lord henry, smiling. 
"all i want now is to look at life. you may come and look at it with me, 
if you care to." 
chapter 4 
one afternoon, a month later, dorian gray was reclining in a luxurious 
arm-chair, in the little library of lord henry's house in mayfair. 
it was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelled 
wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling 
of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk, 
long-fringed persian rugs. on a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette 
by clodion, and beside it lay a copy of les cent nouvelles, bound for 
margaret of valois by clovis eve and powdered with the gilt daisies 
that queen had selected for her device. some large blue china jars 
and parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small 
leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a summer 
day in london. 
lord henry had not yet come in. he was always late on principle, 
his principle being that punctuality is the thief of time. 
so the lad was looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers 
he turned over the pages of an elaborately illustrated edition 
of manon lescaut that he had found in one of the book-cases. the 
formal monotonous ticking of the louis quatorze clock annoyed him. 
once or twice he thought of going away. 
at last he heard a step outside, and the door opened. 
"how late you are, harry!" he murmured. 
"i am afraid it is not harry, mr. gray," answered a shrill voice. 
he glanced quickly round and rose to his feet. "i beg your pardon. 
i thought-" 
"you thought it was my husband. it is only his wife. 
you must let me introduce myself. i know you quite well 
by your photographs. i think my husband has got seventeen 
of them." 
"not seventeen, lady henry?" 
"well, eighteen, then. and i saw you with him the other 
night at the opera." she laughed nervously as she spoke, 
and watched him with her vague forget-me-not eyes. 
she was a curious woman, whose dresses always looked as if 
they had been designed in a rage and put on in a tempest. 
she was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion 
was never returned, she had kept all her illusions. 
she tried to look picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy. 
her name was victoria, and she had a perfect mania for going 
to church. 
"that was at lohengrin, lady henry, i think?" 
"yes; it was at dear lohengrin. i like wagner's music better than 
anybody's. it is so loud that one can talk the whole time without 
other people hearing what one says. that is a great advantage, 
don't you think so, mr. gray?" 
the same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, 
and her fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell 
paper-knife. 
dorian smiled and shook his head: "i am afraid i don't think so, 
lady henry. i never talk during music-at least, during good music. 
if one hears bad music, it is one's duty to drown it in conversation." 
"ah! that is one of harry's views, isn't it, mr. gray? 
i always hear harry's views from his friends. it is the only 
way i get to know of them. but you must not think i don't 
like good music. i adore it, but i am afraid of it. 
it makes me too romantic. i have simply worshipped pianists- 
two at a time, sometimes, harry tells me. i don't know what it 
is about them. perhaps it is that they are foreigners. 
they all are, ain't they? even those that are born 
in england become foreigners after a time, don't they? 
it is so clever of them, and such a compliment to art. 
makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn't it? you have never been 
to any of my parties, have you, mr. gray? you must come. 
i can't afford orchids, but i share no expense in foreigners. 
they make one's rooms look so picturesque. but here is harry! 
harry, i came in to look for you, to ask you something- 
i forget what it was-and i found mr. gray here. 
we have had such a pleasant chat about music. we have quite 
the same ideas. no; i think our ideas are quite different. 
but he has been most pleasant. i am so glad i've seen 
him." 
"i am charmed, my love, quite charmed," said lord henry, elevating his dark, 
crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused smile. 
"so sorry i am late, dorian. i went to look after a piece of old brocade 
in wardour street and had to bargain for hours for it. nowadays people know 
the price of everything and the value of nothing." 
"i am afraid i must be going," exclaimed lady henry, 
breaking an awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh. 
"i have promised to drive with the duchess. good-bye, mr. gray. 
good-bye, harry. you are dining out, i suppose? so am i. perhaps i 
shall see you at lady thornbury's." 
"i dare say, my dear," said lord henry, shutting the door behind her as, 
looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the rain, 
she flitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of frangipanni. 
then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the sofa. 
"never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, dorian," he said 
after a few puffs. 
"why, harry?" 
"because they are so sentimental." 
"but i like sentimental people." 
"never marry at all, dorian. men marry because they are tired; 
women, because they are curious: both are disappointed." 
"i don't think i am likely to marry, harry. i am too much in love. 
that is one of your aphorisms. i am putting it into practice, 
as i do everything that you say." 
"who are you in love with?" asked lord henry after a pause. 
"with an actress," said dorian gray, blushing. 
lord henry shrugged his shoulders. "that is a rather commonplace debut." 
"you would not say so if you saw her, harry." 
"who is she?" 
"her name is sibyl vane." 
"never heard of her." 
"no one has. people will some day, however. she is a genius." 
"my dear boy, no woman is a genius. women are a decorative sex. 
they never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly. 
women represent the triumph of matter over mind, just as men 
represent the triumph of mind over morals." 
"harry, how can you?" 
"my dear dorian, it is quite true. i am analysing women at present, 
so i ought to know. the subject is not so abstruse as i thought it was. 
i find that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, 
the plain and the coloured. the plain women are very useful. 
if you want to gain a reputation for respectability, you have merely 
to take them down to supper. the other women are very charming. 
they commit one mistake, however. they paint in order to try and look young. 
our grandmothers painted in order to try and talk brilliantly. 
rouge and esprit used to go together. that is all over now. 
as long as a woman can look ten years younger than her own daughter, 
she is perfectly satisfied. as for conversation, there are only five 
women in london worth talking to, and two of these can't be admitted into 
decent society. however, tell me about your genius. how long have you 
known her?" 
"ah! harry, your views terrify me." 
"never mind that. how long have you known her?" 
"about three weeks." 
"and where did you come across her?" 
"i will tell you, harry, but you mustn't be unsympathetic about it. 
after all, it never would have happened if i had not met you. 
you filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life. 
for days after i met you, something seemed to throb in my veins. 
as i lounged in the park, or strolled down piccadilly, i used 
to look at every one who passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, 
what sort of lives they led. some of them fascinated me. 
others filled me with terror. there was an exquisite poison in the air. 
i had a passion for sensations. . . . well, one evening about seven 
o'clock, i determined to go out in search of some adventure. 
i felt that this grey monstrous london of ours, with its myriads of people, 
its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins, as you once phrased it, 
must have something in store for me. i fancied a thousand things. 
the mere danger gave me a sense of delight. i remembered what you 
had said to me on that wonderful evening when we first dined together, 
about the search for beauty being the real secret of life. 
i don't know what i expected, but i went out and wandered eastward, 
soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black 
grassless squares. about half-past eight i passed by an absurd 
little theatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills. 
a hideous jew, in the most amazing waistcoat i ever beheld 
in my life, was standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar. 
he had greasy ringlets, and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre 
of a soiled shirt. 'have a box, my lord?' he said, when he saw me, 
and he took off his hat with an air of gorgeous servility. 
there was something about him, harry, that amused me. 
he was such a monster. you will laugh at me, i know, but i 
really went in and paid a whole guinea for the stage-box. to 
the present day i can't make out why i did so; and yet if i hadn't- 
my dear harry, if i hadn't-i should have missed the greatest 
romance of my life. i see you are laughing. it is horrid of 
you!" 
"i am not laughing, dorian; at least i am not laughing at you. 
but you should not say the greatest romance of your life. 
you should say the first romance of your life. you will 
always be loved, and you will always be in love with love. 
a grande passion is the privilege of people who have nothing to do. 
that is the one use of the idle classes of a country. 
don't be afraid. there are exquisite things in store for you. 
this is merely the beginning." 
"do you think my nature so shallow?" cried dorian gray angrily. 
"no; i think your nature so deep." 
"how do you mean?" 
"my dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really 
the shallow people. what they call their loyalty, and their fidelity, 
i call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination. 
faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life 
of the intellect-simply a confession of failure. faithfulness! 
i must analyse it some day. the passion for property is in it. 
there are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid 
that others might pick them up. but i don't want to interrupt you. 
go on with your story." 
"well, i found myself seated in a horrid little private box, 
with a vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face. 
i looked out from behind the curtain and surveyed the house. 
it was a tawdry affair, all cupids and cornucopias, like a 
third-rate wedding-cake. the gallery and pit were fairly full, 
but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and there was 
hardly a person in what i suppose they called the dress-circle. 
women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there was a 
terrible consumption of nuts going on." 
"it must have been just like the palmy days of the british drama." 
"just like, i should fancy, and very depressing. i began to wonder 
what on earth i should do when i caught sight of the play-bill. 
what do you think the play was, harry?" 
"i should think 'the idiot boy', or 'dumb but innocent'. 
our fathers used to like that sort of piece, i believe. 
the longer i live, dorian, the more keenly i feel that whatever 
was good enough for our fathers is not good enough for us. in art, 
as in politics, les grandperes ont toujours tort." 
"this play was good enough for us, harry. it was romeo and juliet. 
i must admit that i was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing shakespeare 
done in such a wretched hole of a place. still, i felt interested, 
in a sort of way. at any rate, i determined to wait for the first act. 
there was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young 
hebrew who sat at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, 
but at last the drop-scene was drawn up and the play began. 
romeo was a stout elderly gentleman, with corked eyebrows, a husky 
tragedy voice, and a figure like a beer-barrel. mercutio was almost 
as bad. he was played by the low-comedian, who had introduced 
gags of his own and was on most friendly terms with the pit. 
they were both as grotesque as the scenery, and that looked as if it 
had come out of a country-booth. but juliet! harry, imagine a girl, 
hardly seventeen years of age, with a little, flowerlike face, 
a small greek head with plaited coils of dark-brown hair, eyes that were 
violet wells of passion, lips that were like the petals of a rose. 
she was the loveliest thing i had ever seen in my life. 
you said to me once that pathos left you unmoved, but that beauty, 
mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears. i tell you, harry, i could 
hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came across me. 
and her voice-i never heard such a voice. it was very low at first, 
with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall singly upon one's ear. 
then it became a little louder, and sounded like a flute or a 
distant hautboy. in the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy 
that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing. 
there were moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins. 
you know how a voice can stir one. your voice and the voice of 
sibyl vane are two things that i shall never forget. when i close 
my eyes, i hear them, and each of them says something different. 
i don't know which to follow. why should i not love her? 
harry, i do love her. she is everything to me in life. 
night after night i go to see her play. one evening she is rosalind, 
and the next evening she is imogen. i have seen her die in the gloom 
of an italian tomb, sucking the poison from her lover's lips. 
i have watched her wandering through the forest of arden, 
disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap. 
she has been mad, and has come into the presence of a guilty king, 
and given him rue to wear and bitter herbs to taste of. 
she has been innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have 
crushed her reedlike throat. i have seen her in every age and in 
every costume. ordinary women never appeal to one's imagination. 
they are limited to their century. no glamour ever transfigures them. 
one knows their minds as easily as one knows their bonnets. 
one can always find them. there is no mystery in any of them. they ride 
in the park in the morning and chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon. 
they have their stereotyped smile and their fashionable manner. 
they are quite obvious. but an actress! how different an actress is! 
harry! why didn't you tell me that the only thing worth loving is an 
actress?" 
"because i have loved so many of them, dorian." 
"oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces." 
"don't run down dyed hair and painted faces. there is an extraordinary 
charm in them, sometimes," said lord henry. 
"i wish now i had not told you about sibyl vane." 
"you could not have helped telling me, dorian. all through your life 
you will tell me everything you do." 
"yes, harry, i believe that is true. i cannot help telling you things. 
you have a curious influence over me. if i ever did a crime, i would come 
and confess it to you. you would understand me." 
"people like you-the wilful sunbeams of life-don't commit crimes, dorian. 
but i am much obliged for the compliment, all the same. and now tell me- 
reach me the matches, like a good boy-thanks-what are your actual relations 
with sibyl vane?" 
dorian gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes. 
"harry! sibyl vane is sacred!" 
"it is only the sacred things that are worth touching, dorian," 
said lord henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice. 
"but why should you be annoyed? i suppose she will belong 
to you some day. when one is in love, one always begins by 
deceiving one's self, and one always ends by deceiving others. 
that is what the world calls a romance. you know her, at any rate, 
i suppose?" 
"of course i know her. on the first night i was at the theatre, 
the horrid old jew came round to the box after the performance was over 
and offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her. 
i was furious with him, and told him that juliet had been dead 
for hundreds of years and that her body was lying in a marble 
tomb in verona. i think, from his blank look of amazement, 
that he was under the impression that i had taken too much champagne, 
or something." 
"i am not surprised." 
"then he asked me if i wrote for any of the newspapers. 
i told him i never even read them. he seemed terribly disappointed 
at that, and confided to me that all the dramatic critics 
were in a conspiracy against him, and that they were every 
one of them to be bought." 
"i should not wonder if he was quite right there. but, on the other hand, 
judging from their appearance, most of them cannot be at all expensive." 
"well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means," 
laughed dorian. "by this time, however, the lights were being 
put out in the theatre, and i had to go. he wanted me to try 
some cigars that he strongly recommended. i declined. 
the next night, of course, i arrived at the place again. 
when he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that i 
was a munificent patron of art. he was a most offensive brute, 
though he had an extraordinary passion for shakespeare. 
he told me once, with an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies 
were entirely due to 'the bard,' as he insisted on calling him. 
he seemed to think it a distinction." 
"it was a distinction, my dear dorian-a great distinction. 
most people become bankrupt through having invested too 
heavily in the prose of life. to have ruined one's self over 
poetry is an honour. but when did you first speak to miss 
sibyl vane?" 
"the third night. she had been playing rosalind. 
i could not help going round. i had thrown her some flowers, 
and she had looked at me-at least i fancied that she had. 
the old jew was persistent. he seemed determined to take me behind, 
so i consented. it was curious my not wanting to know her, 
wasn't it?" 
"no; i don't think so." 
"my dear harry, why?" 
"i will tell you some other time. now i want to know about the girl." 
"sibyl? oh, she was so shy and so gentle. there is something of a 
child about her. her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when i 
told her what i thought of her performance, and she seemed quite 
unconscious of her power. i think we were both rather nervous. 
the old jew stood grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom, 
making elaborate speeches about us both, while we stood looking at 
each other like children. he would insist on calling me 'my lord,' 
so i had to assure sibyl that i was not anything of the kind. 
she said quite simply to me, 'you look more like a prince. 
i must call you prince charming.'" 
"upon my word, dorian, miss sibyl knows how to pay compliments." 
"you don't understand her, harry. she regarded me merely as a person 
in a play. she knows nothing of life. she lives with her mother, 
a faded tired woman who played lady capulet in a sort of magenta 
dressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had seen 
better days." 
"i know that look. it depresses me," murmured lord henry, 
examining his rings. 
"the jew wanted to tell me her history, but i said it did not interest me." 
"you were quite right. there is always something infinitely mean 
about other people's tragedies." 
"sibyl is the only thing i care about. what is it to me 
where she came from? from her little head to her little feet, 
she is absolutely and entirely divine. every night of my life i 
go to see her act, and every night she is more marvellous." 
"that is the reason, i suppose, that you never dine with me now. 
i thought you must have some curious romance on hand. you have; 
but it is not quite what i expected." 
"my dear harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, 
and i have been to the opera with you several times," said dorian, 
opening his blue eyes in wonder. 
"you always come dreadfully late." 
"well, i can't help going to see sibyl play," he cried, "even if it is 
only for a single act. i get hungry for her presence; and when i think 
of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, 
i am filled with awe." 
"you can dine with me to-night, dorian, can't you?" 
he shook his head. "to-night she is imogen," he answered, 
"and to-morrow night she will be juliet." 
"when is she sibyl vane?" 
"never." 
"i congratulate you." 
"how horrid you are! she is all the great heroines of the world in one. 
she is more than an individual. you laugh, but i tell you she 
has genius. i love her, and i must make her love me. you, who know 
all the secrets of life, tell me how to charm sibyl vane to love me! 
i want to make romeo jealous. i want the dead lovers of the world 
to hear our laughter and grow sad. i want a breath of our passion 
to stir their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain. 
my god, harry, how i worship her!" he was walking up and down the room 
as he spoke. hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks. he was 
terribly excited. 
lord henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure. how different 
he was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in basil hallward's studio! 
his nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of scarlet flame. 
out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul, and desire had come to meet 
it on the way. 
"and what do you propose to do?" said lord henry at last. 
"i want you and basil to come with me some night and see her act. 
i have not the slightest fear of the result. you are certain to 
acknowledge her genius. then we must get her out of the jew's hands. 
she is bound to him for three years-at least for two years and eight months- 
from the present time. i shall have to pay him something, of course. 
when all that is settled, i shall take a west end theatre and bring 
her out properly. she will make the world as mad as she has 
made me." 
"that would be impossible, my dear boy." 
"yes, she will. she has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, 
in her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me 
that it is personalities, not principles, that move the age." 
"well, what night shall we go?" 
"let me see. to-day is tuesday. let us fix to-morrow. she plays 
juliet to-morrow." 
"all right. the bristol at eight o'clock; and i will get basil." 
"not eight, harry, please. half-past six. we must be there 
before the curtain rises. you must see her in the first act, 
where she meets romeo." 
"half-past six! what an hour! it will be like having a meat-tea, or reading 
an english novel. it must be seven. no gentleman dines before seven. 
shall you see basil between this and then? or shall i write to him?" 
"dear basil! i have not laid eyes on him for a week. 
it is rather horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in 
the most wonderful frame, specially designed by himself, and, 
though i am a little jealous of the picture for being a whole 
month younger than i am, i must admit that i delight in it. 
perhaps you had better write to him. i don't want to see him alone. 
he says things that annoy me. he gives me good advice." 
lord henry smiled. "people are very fond of giving away what they 
need most themselves. it is what i call the depth of generosity." 
"oh, basil is the best of fellows, but he seems to me to be just a bit 
of a philistine. since i have known you, harry, i have discovered that." 
"basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him 
into his work. the consequence is that he has nothing left for 
life but his prejudices, his principles, and his common sense. 
the only artists i have ever known who are personally delightful 
are bad artists. good artists exist simply in what they make, 
and consequently are perfectly uninteresting in what they are. 
a great poet, a really great poet, is the most unpoetical of 
all creatures. but inferior poets are absolutely fascinating. 
the worse their rhymes are, the more picturesque they look. 
the mere fact of having published a book of second-rate sonnets 
makes a man quite irresistible. he lives the poetry that 
he cannot write. the others write the poetry that they dare 
not realize." 
"i wonder is that really so, harry?" said dorian gray, 
putting some perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, 
gold-topped bottle that stood on the table. "it must be, 
if you say it. and now i am off. imogen is waiting for me. 
don't forget about to-morrow. good-bye." 
as he left the room, lord henry's heavy eyelids drooped, and he began 
to think. certainly few people had ever interested him so much 
as dorian gray, and yet the lad's mad adoration of some one else 
caused him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy. 
he was pleased by it. it made him a more interesting study. 
he had been always enthralled by the methods of natural science, 
but the ordinary subject-matter of that science had seemed to him 
trivial and of no import. and so he had begun by vivisecting himself, 
as he had ended by vivisecting others. human life-that appeared 
to him the one thing worth investigating. compared to it there 
was nothing else of any value. it was true that as one watched 
life in its curious crucible of pain and pleasure, one could 
not wear over one's face a mask of glass, nor keep the sulphurous 
fumes from troubling the brain and making the imagination turbid 
with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams. there were poisons 
so subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken of them. 
there were maladies so strange that one had to pass through them 
if one sought to understand their nature. and, yet, what a great 
reward one received! how wonderful the whole world became to one! 
to note the curious hard logic of passion, and the emotional 
coloured life of the intellect-to observe where they met, 
and where they separated, at what point they were in unison, 
and at what point they were at discord-there was a delight in that! 
what matter what the cost was? one could never pay too high a price for 
any sensation. 
he was conscious-and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into 
his brown agate eyes-that it was through certain words of his, 
musical words said with musical utterance, that dorian gray's soul 
had turned to this white girl and bowed in worship before her. 
to a large extent the lad was his own creation. he had made 
him premature. that was something. ordinary people waited till 
life disclosed to them its secrets, but to the few, to the elect, 
the mysteries of life were revealed before the veil was drawn away. 
sometimes this was the effect of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, 
which dealt immediately with the passions and the intellect. 
but now and then a complex personality took the place and assumed 
the office of art, was indeed, in its way, a real work of art, 
life having its elaborate masterpieces, just as poetry has, or sculpture, 
or painting. 
yes, the lad was premature. he was gathering his harvest while it 
was yet spring. the pulse and passion of youth were in him, 
but he was becoming self-conscious. it was delightful to watch him. 
with his beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to 
wonder at. it was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to end. 
he was like one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, 
whose joys seem to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one's sense 
of beauty, and whose wounds are like red roses. 
soul and body, body and soul-how mysterious they were! there was 
animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality. 
the senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade. who could 
say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began? 
how shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists! 
and yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various schools! 
was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin? or was the body 
really in the soul, as giordano bruno thought? the separation of spirit 
from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter was a 
mystery also. 
he began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute 
a science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us. 
as it was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others. 
experience was of no ethical value. it was merely the name men gave to 
their mistakes. moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of warning, 
had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation of character, 
had praised it as something that taught us what to follow and showed 
us what to avoid. but there was no motive power in experience. 
it was as little of an active cause as conscience itself. all that it 
really demonstrated was that our future would be the same as our past, 
and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we would do many times, 
and with joy. 
it was clear to him that the experimental method was the only 
method by which one could arrive at any scientific analysis 
of the passions; and certainly dorian gray was a subject made 
to his hand, and seemed to promise rich and fruitful results. 
his sudden mad love for sibyl vane was a psychological phenomenon 
of no small interest. there was no doubt that curiosity had much 
to do with it, curiosity and the desire for new experiences, 
yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex passion. 
what there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of boyhood 
had been transformed by the workings of the imagination, 
changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote 
from sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous. 
it was the passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves 
that tyrannized most strongly over us. our weakest motives 
were those of whose nature we were conscious. it often happened 
that when we thought we were experimenting on others we were 
really experimenting on ourselves. 
while lord henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the door, 
and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for dinner. 
he got up and looked out into the street. the sunset had smitten into 
scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite. the panes glowed 
like plates of heated metal. the sky above was like a faded rose. 
he thought of his friend's young fiery-coloured life and wondered how it was 
all going to end. 
when he arrived home, about half-past twelve o'clock, he saw a telegram 
lying on the hall table. he opened it and found it was from dorian gray. 
it was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to sibyl vane. 
chapter 5 
"mother, mother, i am so happy!" whispered the girl, burying her 
face in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, 
with back turned to the shrill intrusive light, was sitting 
in the one arm-chair that their dingy sitting-room contained. 
"i am so happy!" she repeated, "and you must be happy, too!" 
mrs. vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her 
daughter's head. "happy!" she echoed, "i am only happy, sibyl, when i 
see you act. you must not think of anything but your acting. 
mr. isaacs has been very good to us, and we owe him money." 
the girl looked up and pouted. "money, mother?" she cried, 
"what does money matter? love is more than money." 
"mr. isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to get 
a proper outfit for james. you must not forget that, sibyl. fifty pounds 
is a very large sum. mr. isaacs has been most considerate." 
"he is not a gentleman, mother, and i hate the way he talks to me," 
said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window. 
"i don't know how we could manage without him," answered the elder 
woman querulously. 
sibyl vane tossed her head and laughed. "we don't want him 
any more, mother. prince charming rules life for us now." 
then she paused. a rose shook in her blood and shadowed 
her cheeks. quick breath parted the petals of her lips. 
they trembled. some southern wind of passion swept over her 
and stirred the dainty folds of her dress. "i love him," 
she said simply. 
"foolish child! foolish child!" was the parrot-phrase flung in answer. 
the waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to 
the words. 
the girl laughed again. the joy of a caged bird was in her voice. 
her eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed 
for a moment, as though to hide their secret. when they opened, 
the mist of a dream had passed across them. 
thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, 
hinted at prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose 
author apes the name of common sense. she did not listen. 
she was free in her prison of passion. her prince, prince charming, 
was with her. she had called on memory to remake him. 
she had sent her soul to search for him, and it had brought him back. 
his kiss burned again upon her mouth. her eyelids were warm with 
his breath. 
then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery. 
this young man might be rich. if so, marriage should be thought of. 
against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning. 
the arrows of craft shot by her. she saw the thin lips moving, 
and smiled. 
suddenly she felt the need to speak. the wordy silence troubled her. 
"mother, mother," she cried, "why does he love me so much? i know why i 
love him. i love him because he is like what love himself should be. 
but what does he see in me? i am not worthy of him. and yet-why, i 
cannot tell-though i feel so much beneath him, i don't feel humble. 
i feel proud, terribly proud. mother, did you love my father as i love 
prince charming?" 
the elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed 
her cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain. 
sybil rushed to her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her. 
"forgive me, mother. i know it pains you to talk about our father. 
but it only pains you because you loved him so much. don't look so sad. 
i am as happy to-day as you were twenty years ago. ah! let me be happy 
for ever!" 
"my child, you are far too young to think of falling in love. 
besides, what do you know of this young man? you don't 
even know his name. the whole thing is most inconvenient, 
and really, when james is going away to australia, and i have 
so much to think of, i must say that you should have shown 
more consideration. however, as i said before, if he is rich 
"ah! mother, mother, let me be happy!" 
mrs. vane glanced at her, and with one of those false 
theatrical gestures that so often become a mode of second 
nature to a stage-player, clasped her in her arms. 
at this moment, the door opened and a young lad with rough 
brown hair came into the room. he was thick-set of figure, 
and his hands and feet were large and somewhat clumsy in movement. 
he was not so finely bred as his sister. one would hardly 
have guessed the close relationship that existed between them. 
mrs. vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile. 
she mentally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience. 
she felt sure that the tableau was interesting. 
"you might keep some of your kisses for me, sibyl, i think," 
said the lad with a good-natured grumble. 
"ah! but you don't like being kissed, jim," she cried. 
"you are a dreadful old bear." and she ran across the room and 
hugged him. 
james vane looked into his sister's face with tenderness. 
"i want you to come out with me for a walk, sibyl. 
i don't suppose i shall ever see this horrid london again. 
i am sure i don't want to." 
"my son, don't say such dreadful things," murmured mrs. vane, taking up 
a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to patch it. 
she felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group. 
it would have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation. 
"why not, mother? i mean it." 
"you pain me, my son. i trust you will return from australia in a position 
of affluence. i believe there is no society of any kind in the colonies- 
nothing that i would call society-so when you have made your fortune, 
you must come back and assert yourself in london." 
"society!" muttered the lad. "i don't want to know anything about that. 
i should like to make some money to take you and sibyl off the stage. 
i hate it." 
"oh, jim!" said sibyl, laughing, "how unkind of you! 
but are you really going for a walk with me? that will be nice! 
i was afraid you were going to say good-bye to some of your friends- 
to tom hardy, who gave you that hideous pipe, or ned langton, 
who makes fun of you for smoking it. it is very sweet of you 
to let me have your last afternoon. where shall we go? 
let us go to the park." 
"i am too shabby," he answered, frowning. "only swell people go to the park." 
"nonsense, jim," she whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat. 
he hesitated for a moment. "very well," he said at last, 
"but don't be too long dressing." she danced out of the door. 
one could hear her singing as she ran upstairs. her little feet 
pattered overhead. 
he walked up and down the room two or three times. then he turned 
to the still figure in the chair. "mother, are my things ready?" 
he asked. 
"quite ready, james," she answered, keeping her eyes on 
her work. for some months past she had felt ill at ease 
when she was alone with this rough stern son of hers. 
her shallow secret nature was troubled when their eyes met. 
she used to wonder if he suspected anything. the silence, 
for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her. 
she began to complain. women defend themselves by attacking, 
just as they attack by sudden and strange surrenders. 
"i hope you will be contented, james, with your sea-faring life," 
she said. "you must remember that it is your own choice. 
you might have entered a solicitor's office. solicitors are 
a very respectable class, and in the country often dine with 
the best families." 
"i hate offices, and i hate clerks," he replied. "but you are quite right. 
i have chosen my own life. all i say is, watch over sibyl. don't let her 
come to any harm. mother, you must watch over her." 
"james, you really talk very strangely. of course i watch over sibyl." 
"i hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind 
to talk to her. is that right? what about that?" 
"you are speaking about things you don't understand, james. in the profession 
we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying attention. 
i myself used to receive many bouquets at one time. that was when acting 
was really understood. as for sibyl, i do not know at present whether 
her attachment is serious or not. but there is no doubt that the young 
man in question is a perfect gentleman. he is always most polite to me. 
besides, he has the appearance of being rich, and the flowers he sends 
are lovely." 
"you don't know his name, though," said the lad harshly. 
"no," answered his mother with a placid expression in her face. 
"he has not yet revealed his real name. i think it is quite romantic 
of him. he is probably a member of the aristocracy." 
james vane bit his lip. "watch over sibyl, mother," he cried, 
"watch over her." 
"my son, you distress me very much. sibyl is always under my special care. 
of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason why she should 
not contract an alliance with him. i trust he is one of the aristocracy. 
he has all the appearance of it, i must say. it might be a most brilliant 
marriage for sibyl. they would make a charming couple. his good looks are 
really quite remarkable; everybody notices them." 
the lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane 
with his coarse fingers. he had just turned round to say something 
when the door opened and sibyl ran in. 
"how serious you both are!" she cried. "what is the matter?" 
"nothing," he answered. "i suppose one must be serious sometimes. 
good-bye, mother; i will have my dinner at five o'clock. everything 
is packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble." 
"good-bye, my son," she answered with a bow of strained stateliness. 
she was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, 
and there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid. 
"kiss me, mother," said the girl. her flowerlike lips touched the withered 
cheek and warmed its frost. 
"my child! my child!" cried mrs. vane, looking up to the ceiling 
in search of an imaginary gallery. 
"come, sibyl," said her brother impatiently. he hated 
his mother's affectations. 
they went out into the flickering, wind-blown sunlight and strolled 
down the dreary euston road. the passersby glanced in wonder 
at the sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, 
was in the company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl. 
he was like a common gardener walking with a rose. 
jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive 
glance of some stranger. he had that dislike of being stared at, 
which comes on geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace. 
sibyl, however, was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing. 
her love was trembling in laughter on her lips. she was thinking 
of prince charming, and, that she might think of him all the more, 
she did not talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in which 
jim was going to sail, about the gold he was certain to find, 
about the wonderful heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked, 
red-shirted bushrangers. for he was not to remain a sailor, 
or a supercargo, or whatever he was going to be. oh, no! a sailor's 
existence was dreadful. fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship, 
with the hoarse, hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black wind 
blowing the masts down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands! 
he was to leave the vessel at melbourne, bid a polite good-bye 
to the captain, and go off at once to the gold-fields. before 
a week was over he was to come across a large nugget of pure gold, 
the largest nugget that had ever been discovered, and bring it 
down to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted policemen. 
the bushrangers were to attack them three times, and be defeated 
with immense slaughter. or, no. he was not to go to the gold-fields 
at all. they were horrid places, where men got intoxicated, 
and shot each other in bar-rooms, and used bad language. he was 
to be a nice sheep-farmer, and one evening, as he was riding home, 
he was to see the beautiful heiress being carried off by a robber 
on a black horse, and give chase, and rescue her. of course, 
she would fall in love with him, and he with her, and they would 
get married, and come home, and live in an immense house in london. 
yes, there were delightful things in store for him. but he must 
be very good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money foolishly. 
she was only a year older than he was, but she knew so much more 
of life. he must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, 
and to say his prayers each night before he went to sleep. 
god was very good, and would watch over him. she would pray 
for him, too, and in a few years he would come back quite rich and 
happy. 
the lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer. he was heart-sick 
at leaving home. 
yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose. 
inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense 
of the danger of sibyl's position. this young dandy who was 
making love to her could mean her no good. he was a gentleman, 
and he hated him for that, hated him through some curious 
race-instinct for which he could not account, and which for that 
reason was all the more dominant within him. he was conscious 
also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother's nature, 
and in that saw infinite peril for sibyl and sibyl's happiness. 
children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they 
judge them; sometimes they forgive them. 
his mother! he had something on his mind to ask of her, 
something that he had brooded on for many months of silence. 
a chance phrase that he had heard at the theatre, a whispered 
sneer that had reached his ears one night as he waited at 
the stage-door, had set loose a train of horrible thoughts. 
he remembered it as if it had been the lash of a hunting-crop 
across his face. his brows knit together into a wedgelike furrow, 
and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip. 
"you are not listening to a word i am saying, jim," cried sibyl, 
"and i am making the most delightful plans for your future. 
do say something." 
"what do you want me to say?" 
"oh! that you will be a good boy and not forget us," she answered, 
smiling at him. 
he shrugged his shoulders. "you are more likely to forget me than i am 
to forget you, sibyl." 
she flushed. "what do you mean, jim?" she asked. 
"you have a new friend, i hear. who is he? why have you not told me 
about him? he means you no good." 
"stop, jim!" she exclaimed. "you must not say anything against him. 
i love him." 
"why, you don't even know his name," answered the lad. "who is he? 
i have a right to know." 
"he is called prince charming. don't you like the name. 
oh! you silly boy! you should never forget it. if you only saw him, 
you would think him the most wonderful person in the world. 
some day you will meet him-when you come back from australia. 
you will like him so much. everybody likes him, and i ... 
love him. i wish you could come to the theatre to-night. he 
is going to be there, and i am to play juliet. oh! how i 
shall play it! fancy, jim, to be in love and play juliet! 
to have him sitting there! to play for his delight! 
i am afraid i may frighten the company, frighten or enthrall them. 
to be in love is to surpass one's self. poor dreadful 
mr. isaacs will be shouting 'genius' to his loafers at the bar. 
he has preached me as a dogma; to-night he will announce me 
as a revelation. i feel it. and it is all his, his only, 
prince charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces. 
but i am poor beside him. poor? what does that matter? 
when poverty creeps in at the door, love flies in through the window. 
our proverbs want rewriting. they were made in winter, and it is 
summer now; spring-time for me, i think, a very dance of blossoms 
in blue skies." 
"he is a gentleman," said the lad sullenly. 
"a prince!" she cried musically. "what more do you want?" 
"he wants to enslave you." 
"i shudder at the thought of being free." 
"i want you to beware of him." 
"to see him is to worship him; to know him is to trust him." 
"sibyl, you are mad about him." 
she laughed and took his arm. "you dear old jim, you talk as 
if you were a hundred. some day you will be in love yourself. 
then you will know what it is. don't look so sulky. 
surely you should be glad to think that, though you are 
going away, you leave me happier than i have ever been before. 
life has been hard for us both, terribly hard and difficult. 
but it will be different now. you are going to a new world, 
and i have found one. here are two chairs; let us sit down and see 
the smart people go by." 
they took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers. the tulip-beds 
across the road flamed like throbbing rings of fire. a white dust- 
tremulous cloud of orris-root it seemed-hung in the panting air. 
the brightly coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous butterflies. 
she made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects. 
he spoke slowly and with effort. they passed words to each other 
as players at a game pass counters. sibyl felt oppressed. she could 
not communicate her joy. a faint smile curving that sullen mouth 
was all the echo she could win. after some time she became silent. 
suddenly she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, 
and in an open carriage with two ladies dorian gray drove past. 
she started to her feet. "there he is!" she cried. 
"who?" said jim vane. 
"prince charming," she answered, looking after the victoria. 
he jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm. "show him to me. 
which is he? point him out. i must see him!" he exclaimed; 
but at that moment the duke of berwick's four-in-hand came between, 
and when it had left the space clear, the carriage had swept out of 
the park. 
"he is gone," murmured sibyl sadly. "i wish you had seen him." 
"i wish i had, for as sure as there is a god in heaven, 
if he ever does you any wrong, i shall kill him." 
she looked at him in horror. he repeated his words. 
they cut the air like a dagger. the people round began to gape. 
a lady standing close to her tittered. 
"come away, jim; come away," she whispered. he followed her doggedly 
as she passed through the crowd. he felt glad at what he had said. 
when they reached the achilles statue, she turned round. 
there was pity in her eyes that became laughter on her lips. 
she shook her head at him. "you are foolish, jim, utterly foolish; 
a bad-tempered boy, that is all. how can you say such 
horrible things? you don't know what you are talking about. 
you are simply jealous and unkind. ah! i wish you would 
fall in love. love makes people good, and what you said 
was wicked." 
"i am sixteen," he answered, "and i know what i am about. 
mother is no help to you. she doesn't understand how to look 
after you. i wish now that i was not going to australia at all. 
i have a great mind to chuck the whole thing up. i would, if my 
articles hadn't been signed." 
"oh, don't be so serious, jim. you are like one of the heroes 
of those silly melodramas mother used to be so fond of acting in. 
i am not going to quarrel with you. i have seen him, and oh! to see 
him is perfect happiness. we won't quarrel. i know you would never 
harm any one i love, would you?" 
"not as long as you love him, i suppose," was the sullen answer. 
"i shall love him for ever!" she cried. 
"and he?" 
"for ever, too!" 
"he had better." 
she shrank from him. then she laughed and put her hand on his arm. 
he was merely a boy. 
at the marble arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close 
to their shabby home in the euston road. it was after five o'clock, 
and sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting. 
jim insisted that she should do so. he said that he would sooner 
part with her when their mother was not present. she would be sure 
to make a scene, and he detested scenes of every kind. 
in sybil's own room they parted. there was jealousy in the lad's heart, 
and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed to him, 
had come between them. yet, when her arms were flung round his neck, 
and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed her with 
real affection. there were tears in his eyes as he went downstairs. 
his mother was waiting for him below. she grumbled at his unpunctuality, 
as he entered. he made no answer, but sat down to his meagre meal. 
the flies buzzed round the table and crawled over the stained cloth. 
through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of street-cabs, 
he could hear the droning voice devouring each minute that was left 
to him. 
after some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his hands. 
he felt that he had a right to know. it should have been told to him before, 
if it was as he suspected. leaden with fear, his mother watched him. 
words dropped mechanically from her lips. a tattered lace handkerchief 
twitched in her fingers. when the clock struck six, he got up and went 
to the door. then he turned back and looked at her. their eyes met. 
in hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy. it enraged him. 
"mother, i have something to ask you," he said. her eyes wandered 
vaguely about the room. she made no answer. "tell me the truth. 
i have a right to know. were you married to my father?" 
she heaved a deep sigh. it was a sigh of relief. the terrible moment, 
the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded, 
had come at last, and yet she felt no terror. indeed, in some measure it 
was a disappointment to her. the vulgar directness of the question called 
for a direct answer. the situation had not been gradually led up to. 
it was crude. it reminded her of a bad rehearsal. 
"no," she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of life. 
"my father was a scoundrel then!" cried the lad, clenching his fists. 
she shook her head. "i knew he was not free. we loved each other 
very much. if he had lived, he would have made provision for us. 
don't speak against him, my son. he was your father, and a gentleman. 
indeed, he was highly connected." 
an oath broke from his lips. "i don't care for myself," 
he exclaimed, "but don't let sibyl. . . . it is a gentleman, 
isn't it, who is in love with her, or says he is? 
highly connected, too, i suppose." 
for a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman. 
her head drooped. she wiped her eyes with shaking hands. 
"sibyl has a mother," she murmured; "i had none." 
the lad was touched. he went towards her, and stooping down, 
he kissed her. "i am sorry if i have pained you by asking about 
my father," he said, "but i could not help it. i must go now. 
good-bye. don't forget that you will have only one child now 
to look after, and believe me that if this man wrongs my sister, 
i will find out who he is, track him down, and kill him like a dog. 
i swear it." 
the exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture 
that accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem 
more vivid to her. she was familiar with the atmosphere. 
she breathed more freely, and for the first time for many months 
she really admired her son. she would have liked to have continued 
the scene on the same emotional scale, but he cut her short. 
trunks had to be carried down and mufflers looked for. 
the lodging-house drudge bustled in and out. there was the bargaining 
with the cabman. the moment was lost in vulgar details. 
it was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that she waved the 
tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son drove away. 
she was conscious that a great opportunity had been wasted. 
she consoled herself by telling sibyl how desolate she felt her 
life would be, now that she had only one child to look after. 
she remembered the phrase. it had pleased her. of the threat 
she said nothing. it was vividly and dramatically expressed. 
she felt that they would all laugh at it some day. 
chapter 6 
"i suppose you have heard the news, basil?" said lord henry 
that evening as hallward was shown into a little private room 
at the bristol where dinner had been laid for three. 
"no, harry," answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to 
the bowing waiter. "what is it? nothing about politics, i hope! 
they don't interest me. there is hardly a single person in the house 
of commons worth painting, though many of them would be the better 
for a little whitewashing." 
"dorian gray is engaged to be married," said lord henry, 
watching him as he spoke. 
hallward started and then frowned. "dorian engaged to be married!" 
he cried. "impossible!" 
"it is perfectly true." 
"to whom?" 
"to some little actress or other." 
"i can't believe it. dorian is far too sensible." 
"dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and then, 
my dear basil." 
"marriage is hardly a thing that one can do now and then, harry." 
"except in america," rejoined lord henry languidly. "but i 
didn't say he was married. i said he was engaged to be married. 
there is a great difference. i have a distinct remembrance of 
being married, but i have no recollection at all of being engaged. 
i am inclined to think that i never was engaged." 
"but think of dorian's birth, and position, and wealth. 
it would be absurd for him to marry so much beneath him." 
"if you want to make him marry this girl, tell him that, basil. he is 
sure to do it, then. whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, 
it is always from the noblest motives." 
"i hope the girl is good, harry. i don't want to see dorian tied to some 
vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his intellect." 
"oh, she is better than good-she is beautiful," murmured lord henry, 
sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters. "dorian says she 
is beautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind. 
your portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal 
appearance of other people. it has had that excellent effect, 
amongst others. we are to see her to-night, if that boy doesn't forget 
his appointment." 
"are you serious?" 
"quite serious, basil. i should be miserable if i thought i 
should ever be more serious than i am at the present moment." 
"but do you approve of it, harry?" asked the painter, 
walking up and down the room and biting his lip. "you can't 
approve of it, possibly. it is some silly infatuation." 
"i never approve, or disapprove, of anything now. it is an absurd 
attitude to take towards life. we are not sent into the world 
to air our moral prejudices. i never take any notice of what common 
people say, and i never interfere with what charming people do. 
if a personality fascinates me, whatever mode of expression that 
personality selects is absolutely delightful to me. dorian gray 
falls in love with a beautiful girl who acts juliet, and proposes 
to marry her. why not? if he wedded messalina, he would be none 
the less interesting. you know i am not a champion of marriage. 
the real drawback to marriage is that it makes one unselfish. 
and unselfish people are colourless. they lack individuality. 
still, there are certain temperaments that marriage makes more complex. 
they retain their egotism, and add to it many other egos. 
they are forced to have more than one life. they become more 
highly organized, and to be highly organized is, i should fancy, 
the object of man's existence. besides, every experience 
is of value, and whatever one may say against marriage, 
it is certainly an experience. i hope that dorian gray will 
make this girl his wife, passionately adore her for six months, 
and then suddenly become fascinated by some one else. he would be a 
wonderful study." 
"you don't mean a single word of all that, harry; you know you don't. if 
dorian gray's life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier than yourself. 
you are much better than you pretend to be." 
lord henry laughed. "the reason we all like to think 
so well of others is that we are all afraid for ourselves. 
the basis of optimism is sheer terror. we think that we are 
generous because we credit our neighbour with the possession 
of those virtues that are likely to be a benefit to us. 
we praise the banker that we may overdraw our account, 
and find good qualities in the highwayman in the hope that 
he may spare our pockets. i mean everything that i have said. 
i have the greatest contempt for optimism. as for a spoiled life, 
no life is spoiled but one whose growth is arrested. 
if you want to mar a nature, you have merely to reform it. 
as for marriage, of course that would be silly, but there are other 
and more interesting bonds between men and women. i will certainly 
encourage them. they have the charm of being fashionable. 
but here is dorian himself. he will tell you more than 
i can." 
"my dear harry, my dear basil, you must both congratulate me!" 
said the lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined 
wings and shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn. 
"i have never been so happy. of course, it is sudden- 
all really delightful things are. and yet it seems to me 
to be the one thing i have been looking for all my life." 
he was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked 
extraordinarily handsome. 
"i hope you will always be very happy, dorian," said hallward, "but i 
don't quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement. 
you let harry know." 
"and i don't forgive you for being late for dinner," broke in lord henry, 
putting his hand on the lad's shoulder and smiling as he spoke. 
"come, let us sit down and try what the new chef here is like, and then you 
will tell us how it all came about." 
"there is really not much to tell," cried dorian as they took their 
seats at the small round table. "what happened was simply this. 
after i left you yesterday evening, harry, i dressed, had some 
dinner at that little italian restaurant in rupert street you 
introduced me to, and went down at eight o'clock to the theatre. 
sibyl was playing rosalind. of course, the scenery was dreadful 
and the orlando absurd. but sibyl! you should have seen her! 
when she came on in her boy's clothes, she was perfectly wonderful. 
she wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin with cinnamon sleeves, 
slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little green cap with a hawk's 
feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak lined with dull red. 
she had never seemed to me more exquisite. she had all the delicate 
grace of that tanagra figurine that you have in your studio, basil. 
her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves round a pale rose. 
as for her acting-well, you shall see her to-night. she is simply 
a born artist. i sat in the dingy box absolutely enthralled. 
i forgot that i was in london and in the nineteenth century. 
i was away with my love in a forest that no man had ever seen. 
after the performance was over, i went behind and spoke to her. 
as we were sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes a look 
that i had never seen there before. my lips moved towards hers. 
we kissed each other. i can't describe to you what i felt at that moment. 
it seemed to me that all my life had been narrowed to one perfect 
point of rose-coloured joy. she trembled all over and shook 
like a white narcissus. then she flung herself on her knees 
and kissed my hands. i feel that i should not tell you all this, 
but i can't help it. of course, our engagement is a dead secret. 
she has not even told her own mother. i don't know what my guardians 
will say. lord radley is sure to be furious. i don't care. 
i shall be of age in less than a year, and then i can do what i like. 
i have been right, basil, haven't i, to take my love out of poetry 
and to find my wife in shakespeare's plays? lips that shakespeare 
taught to speak have whispered their secret in my ear. 
i have had the arms of rosalind around me, and kissed juliet on the 
mouth." 
"yes, dorian, i suppose you were right," said hallward slowly. 
"have you seen her to-day?" asked lord henry. 
dorian gray shook his head. "i left her in the forest of arden; 
i shall find her in an orchard in verona." 
lord henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner. 
"at what particular point did you mention the word marriage, dorian? 
and what did she say in answer? perhaps you forgot all about it." 
"my dear harry, i did not treat it as a business transaction, 
and i did not make any formal proposal. i told her that i 
loved her, and she said she was not worthy to be my wife. 
not worthy! why, the whole world is nothing to me compared 
with her." 
"women are wonderfully practical," murmured lord henry, 
"much more practical than we are. in situations of that kind 
we often forget to say anything about marriage, and they always 
remind us." 
hallward laid his hand upon his arm. "don't, harry. 
you have annoyed dorian. he is not like other men. 
he would never bring misery upon any one. his nature is too fine 
for that." 
lord henry looked across the table. "dorian is never annoyed with me," 
he answered. "i asked the question for the best reason possible, 
for the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any question- 
simple curiosity. i have a theory that it is always the women who 
propose to us, and not we who propose to the women. except, of course, 
in middle-class life. but then the middle classes are not modern." 
dorian gray laughed, and tossed his head. "you are quite 
incorrigible, harry; but i don't mind. it is impossible to be angry 
with you. when you see sibyl vane, you will feel that the man 
who could wrong her would be a beast, a beast without a heart. 
i cannot understand how any one can wish to shame the thing 
he loves. i love sibyl vane. i want to place her on a pedestal 
of gold and to see the world worship the woman who is mine. 
what is marriage? an irrevocable vow. you mock at it for that. 
ah! don't mock. it is an irrevocable vow that i want to take. 
her trust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good. 
when i am with her, i regret all that you have taught me. 
i become different from what you have known me to be. 
i am changed, and the mere touch of sibyl vane's hand makes 
me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating, poisonous, 
delightful theories." 
"and those are ... ?" asked lord henry, helping himself to some salad. 
"oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, 
your theories about pleasure. all your theories, in fact, harry." 
"pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about," 
he answered in his slow melodious voice. "but i am afraid 
i cannot claim my theory as my own. it belongs to nature, 
not to me. pleasure is nature's test, her sign of approval. 
when we are happy, we are always good, but when we are good, 
we are not always happy." 
"ah! but what do you mean by good?" cried basil hallward. 
"yes," echoed dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at lord 
henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood 
in the centre of the table, "what do you mean by good, harry?" 
"to be good is to be in harmony with one's self," he replied, 
touching the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers. 
"discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others. 
one's own life-that is the important thing. as for the lives 
of one's neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a puritan, 
one can flaunt one's moral views about them, but they are not 
one's concern. besides, individualism has really the higher aim. 
modern morality consists in accepting the standard of one's age. 
i consider that for any man of culture to accept the standard of his age is 
a form of the grossest immorality." 
"but, surely, if one lives merely for one's self, harry, one pays 
a terrible price for doing so?" suggested the painter. 
"yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays. i should 
fancy that the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford 
nothing but self-denial. beautiful sins, like beautiful things, 
are the privilege of the rich." 
"one has to pay in other ways but money." 
"what sort of ways, basil?" 
"oh! i should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in . . . well, 
in the consciousness of degradation." 
lord henry shrugged his shoulders. "my dear fellow, mediaeval art 
is charming, but mediaeval emotions are out of date. one can use 
them in fiction, of course. but then the only things that one can 
use in fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact. 
believe me, no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized 
man ever knows what a pleasure is." 
"i know what pleasure is," cried dorian gray. "it is to adore some one." 
"that is certainly better than being adored," he answered, 
toying with some fruits. "being adored is a nuisance. 
women treat us just as humanity treats its gods. 
they worship us, and are always bothering us to do something 
for them." 
"i should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to us," 
murmured the lad gravely. "they create love in our natures. they have a 
right to demand it back." 
"that is quite true, dorian," cried hallward. 
"nothing is ever quite true," said lord henry. 
"this is," interrupted dorian. "you must admit, harry, that women 
give to men the very gold of their lives." 
"possibly," he sighed, "but they invariably want it back in such 
very small change. that is the worry. women, as some witty 
frenchman once put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces 
and always prevent us from carrying them out." 
"harry, you are dreadful! i don't know why i like you so much." 
"you will always like me, dorian," he replied. "will you have some coffee, 
you fellows? waiter, bring coffee, and fine-champagne, and some cigarettes. 
no, don't mind the cigarettes-i have some. basil, i can't allow you to 
smoke cigars. you must have a cigarette. a cigarette is the perfect type 
of a perfect pleasure. it is exquisite, and it leaves one unsatisfied. 
what more can one want? yes, dorian, you will always be fond of me. 
i represent to you all the sins you have never had the courage to commit." 
"what nonsense you talk, harry!" cried the lad, taking a light from 
a fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table. 
"let us go down to the theatre. when sibyl comes on the stage you will 
have a new ideal of life. she will represent something to you that you 
have never known." 
"i have known everything," said lord henry, with a tired 
look in his eyes, "but i am always ready for a new emotion. 
i am afraid, however, that, for me at any rate, there is 
no such thing. still, your wonderful girl may thrill me. 
i love acting. it is so much more real than life. let us go. 
dorian, you will come with me. i am so sorry, basil, but there 
is only room for two in the brougham. you must follow us in 
a hansom." 
they got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing. 
the painter was silent and preoccupied. there was a gloom over him. 
he could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him 
to be better than many other things that might have happened. 
after a few minutes, they all passed downstairs. he drove off by himself, 
as had been arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little 
brougham in front of him. a strange sense of loss came over him. 
he felt that dorian gray would never again be to him all that he had 
been in the past. life had come between them.... his eyes darkened, 
and the crowded flaring streets became blurred to his eyes. 
when the cab drew up at the theatre, it seemed to him that he had grown 
years older. 
chapter 7 
for some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, 
and the fat jew manager who met them at the door was 
beaming from ear to ear with an oily tremulous smile. 
he escorted them to their box with a sort of pompous humility, 
waving his fat jewelled hands and talking at the top of his voice. 
dorian gray loathed him more than ever. he felt as if he had 
come to look for miranda and had been met by caliban. 
lord henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him. 
at least he declared he did, and insisted on shaking him 
by the hand and assuring him that he was proud to meet a man 
who had discovered a real genius and gone bankrupt over a poet. 
hallward amused himself with watching the faces in the pit. 
the heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight 
flamed like a monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire. 
the youths in the gallery had taken off their coats 
and waistcoats and hung them over the side. they talked 
to each other across the theatre and shared their oranges 
with the tawdry girls who sat beside them. some women 
were laughing in the pit. their voices were horribly shrill 
and discordant. the sound of the popping of corks came from 
the bar. 
"what a place to find one's divinity in!" said lord henry. 
"yes!" answered dorian gray. "it was here i found her, and she is divine 
beyond all living things. when she acts, you will forget everything. 
these common rough people, with their coarse faces and brutal gestures, 
become quite different when she is on the stage. they sit silently 
and watch her. they weep and laugh as she wills them to do. 
she makes them as responsive as a violin. she spiritualizes them, 
and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one's self." 
"the same flesh and blood as one's self! oh, i hope not!" 
exclaimed lord henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery 
through his opera-glass. 
"don't pay any attention to him, dorian," said the painter. 
"i understand what you mean, and i believe in this girl. 
any one you love must be marvellous, and any girl 
who has the effect you describe must be fine and noble. 
to spiritualize one's age-that is something worth doing. 
if this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without one, 
if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives 
have been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their 
selfishness and lend them tears for sorrows that are not 
their own, she is worthy of all your adoration, worthy of 
the adoration of the world. this marriage is quite right. 
i did not think so at first, but i admit it now. 
the gods made sibyl vane for you. without her you would have 
been incomplete." 
"thanks, basil," answered dorian gray, pressing his hand. 
"i knew that you would understand me. harry is so cynical, 
he terrifies me. but here is the orchestra. it is 
quite dreadful, but it only lasts for about five minutes. 
then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl to whom i 
am going to give all my life, to whom i have given everything 
that is good in me." 
a quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of applause, 
sibyl vane stepped on to the stage. yes, she was certainly lovely to look at- 
one of the loveliest creatures, lord henry thought, that he had ever seen. 
there was something of the fawn in her shy grace and startled eyes. 
a faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a mirror of silver, came to her 
cheeks as she glanced at the crowded enthusiastic house. she stepped back 
a few paces and her lips seemed to tremble. basil hallward leaped to his feet 
and began to applaud. motionless, and as one in a dream, sat dorian gray, 
gazing at her. lord henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, 
"charming! charming!" 
the scene was the hall of capulet's house, and romeo in his pilgrim's 
dress had entered with mercutio and his other friends. the band, 
such as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began. 
through the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, sibyl vane 
moved like a creature from a finer world. her body swayed, 
while she danced, as a plant sways in the water. the curves of her 
throat were the curves of a white lily. her hands seemed to be made 
of cool ivory. 
yet she was curiously listless. she showed no sign of joy 
when her eyes rested on romeo. the few words she had to speak- 
good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, 
which mannerly devotion shows in this; 
for saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch, 
and palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss- 
with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a 
thoroughly artificial manner. the voice was exquisite, 
but from the point of view of tone it was absolutely false. 
it was wrong in colour. it took away all the life from the verse. 
it made the passion unreal. 
dorian gray grew pale as he watched her. he was puzzled and anxious. 
neither of his friends dared to say anything to him. she seemed to them 
to be absolutely incompetent. they were horribly disappointed. 
yet they felt that the true test of any juliet is the balcony scene 
of the second act. they waited for that. if she failed there, 
there was nothing in her. 
she looked charming as she came out in the moonlight. 
that could not be denied. but the staginess of her acting 
was unbearable, and grew worse as she went on. her gestures 
became absurdly artificial. she overemphasized everything 
that she had to say. the beautiful passage- 
thou knowest the mask of night is on my face, 
else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek 
for that which thou hast heard me speak to-night- 
was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been 
taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution. when she 
leaned over the balcony and came to those wonderful lines- 
although i joy in thee, 
i have no joy of this contract to-night: 
it is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden; 
too like the lightning, which doth cease to be 
ere one can say, "it lightens." sweet, good-night! 
this bud of love by summer's ripening breath 
may prove a beauteous flower when next we meet- 
she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her. it was 
not nervousness. indeed, so far from being nervous, she was absolutely 
self-contained. it was simply bad art. she was a complete failure. 
even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost their 
interest in the play. they got restless, and began to talk loudly and to 
whistle. the jew manager, who was standing at the back of the 
dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage. the only person unmoved was 
the girl herself. 
when the second act was over, there came a storm of hisses, 
and lord henry got up from his chair and put on his coat. 
"she is quite beautiful, dorian," he said, "but she can't act. 
let us go." 
"i am going to see the play through," answered the lad, 
in a hard bitter voice. "i am awfully sorry that i have made 
you waste an evening, harry. i apologize to you both." 
"my dear dorian, i should think miss vane was ill," interrupted hallward. 
"we will come some other night." 
"i wish she were ill," he rejoined. "but she seems to me 
to be simply callous and cold. she has entirely altered. 
last night she was a great artist. this evening she is merely a 
commonplace mediocre actress." 
"don't talk like that about any one you love, dorian. love is a more 
wonderful thing than art." 
"they are both simply forms of imitation," remarked lord henry. 
"but do let us go. dorian, you must not stay here any longer. 
it is not good for one's morals to see bad acting. 
besides, i don't suppose you will want your wife to act, 
so what does it matter if she plays juliet like a wooden doll? 
she is very lovely, and if she knows as little about life 
as she does about acting, she will be a delightful experience. 
there are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating- 
people who know absolutely everything, and people who know 
absolutely nothing. good heavens, my dear boy, don't look so tragic! 
the secret of remaining young is never to have an emotion 
that is unbecoming. come to the club with basil and myself. 
we will smoke cigarettes and drink to the beauty of sibyl vane. 
she is beautiful. what more can you want?" 
"go away, harry," cried the lad. "i want to be alone. basil, you must go. 
ah! can't you see that my heart is breaking?" the hot tears came 
to his eyes. his lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, 
he leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands. 
"let us go, basil," said lord henry with a strange tenderness in his voice, 
and the two young men passed out together. 
a few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose 
on the third act. dorian gray went back to his seat. he looked pale, 
and proud, and indifferent. the play dragged on, and seemed interminable. 
half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots and laughing. 
the whole thing was a fiasco. the last act was played to almost 
empty benches. the curtain went down on a titter and some groans. 
as soon as it was over, dorian gray rushed behind the scenes into 
the greenroom. the girl was standing there alone, with a look 
of triumph on her face. her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire. 
there was a radiance about her. her parted lips were smiling over 
some secret of their own. 
when he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy 
came over her. "how badly i acted to-night, dorian!" she cried. 
"horribly!" he answered, gazing at her in amazement. "horribly! 
it was dreadful. are you ill? you have no idea what it was. 
you have no idea what i suffered." 
the girl smiled. "dorian," she answered, lingering over 
his name with long-drawn music in her voice, as though it 
were sweeter than honey to the red petals of her mouth. 
"dorian, you should have understood. but you understand now, 
don't you?" 
"understand what?" he asked, angrily. 
"why i was so bad to-night. why i shall always be bad. 
why i shall never act well again." 
he shrugged his shoulders. "you are ill, i suppose. 
when you are ill you shouldn't act. you make yourself ridiculous. 
my friends were bored. i was bored." 
she seemed not to listen to him. she was transfigured with joy. 
an ecstasy of happiness dominated her. 
"dorian, dorian," she cried, "before i knew you, acting was the one 
reality of my life. it was only in the theatre that i lived. i thought 
that it was all true. i was rosalind one night and portia the other. 
the joy of beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of cordelia were mine also. 
i believed in everything. the common people who acted with me seemed 
to me to be godlike. the painted scenes were my world. i knew nothing 
but shadows, and i thought them real. you came-oh, my beautiful love!- 
and you freed my soul from prison. you taught me what reality really is. 
to-night, for the first time in my life, i saw through the hollowness, 
the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in which i had always played. 
to-night, for the first time, i became conscious that the romeo was hideous, 
and old, and painted, that the moonlight in the orchard was false, 
that the scenery was vulgar, and that the words i had to speak were unreal, 
were not my words, were not what i wanted to say. you had brought me 
something higher, something of which all art is but a reflection. 
you had made me understand what love really is. my love! my love! 
prince charming! prince of life! i have grown sick of shadows. 
you are more to me than all art can ever be. what have i to do with 
the puppets of a play? when i came on to-night, i could not understand 
how it was that everything had gone from me. i thought that i was going 
to be wonderful. i found that i could do nothing. suddenly it dawned 
on my soul what it all meant. the knowledge was exquisite to me. i heard 
them hissing, and i smiled. what could they know of love such as ours? 
take me away, dorian-take me away with you, where we can be quite alone. 
i hate the stage. i might mimic a passion that i do not feel, 
but i cannot mimic one that burns me like fire. oh, dorian, dorian, 
you understand now what it signifies? even if i could do it, it would 
be profanation for me to play at being in love. you have made me see 
that." 
he flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face. 
"you have killed my love," he muttered. 
she looked at him in wonder and laughed. he made no answer. 
she came across to him, and with her little fingers stroked 
his hair. she knelt down and pressed his hands to her lips. 
he drew them away, and a shudder ran through him. 
then he leaped up and went to the door. "yes," he cried, 
"you have killed my love. you used to stir my imagination. 
now you don't even stir my curiosity. you simply produce no effect. 
i loved you because you were marvellous, because you had genius 
and intellect, because you realized the dreams of great 
poets and gave shape and substance to the shadows of art. 
you have thrown it all away. you are shallow and stupid. 
my god! how mad i was to love you! what a fool i have been! 
you are nothing to me now. i will never see you again. 
i will never think of you. i will never mention your name. 
you don't know what you were to me, once. why, once . . . oh, 
i can't bear to think of it! i wish i had never laid 
eyes upon you! you have spoiled the romance of my life. 
how little you can know of love, if you say it mars your art! 
without your art, you are nothing. i would have made 
you famous, splendid, magnificent. the world would 
have worshipped you, and you would have borne my name. 
what are you now? a third-rate actress with a pretty 
face." 
the girl grew white, and trembled. she clenched her hands together, 
and her voice seemed to catch in her throat. "you are not serious, dorian?" 
she murmured. "you are acting." 
"acting! i leave that to you. you do it so well," he answered bitterly. 
she rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain 
in her face, came across the room to him. she put her hand 
upon his arm and looked into his eyes. he thrust her back. 
"don't touch me!" he cried. 
a low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet 
and lay there like a trampled flower. "dorian, dorian, 
don't leave me!" she whispered. "i am so sorry i didn't act well. 
i was thinking of you all the time. but i will try-indeed, i 
will try. it came so suddenly across me, my love for you. 
i think i should never have known it if you had not kissed me- 
if we had not kissed each other. kiss me again, my love. 
don't go away from me. i couldn't bear it. oh! don't go away 
from me. my brother . . . no; never mind. he didn't mean it. 
he was in jest. . . . but you, oh! can't you forgive me for 
to-night? i will work so hard and try to improve. don't be cruel 
to me, because i love you better than anything in the world. 
after all, it is only once that i have not pleased you. 
but you are quite right, dorian. i should have shown 
myself more of an artist. it was foolish of me, and yet i 
couldn't help it. oh, don't leave me, don't leave me." 
a fit of passionate sobbing choked her. she crouched on 
the floor like a wounded thing, and dorian gray, with his 
beautiful eyes, looked down at her, and his chiselled lips curled 
in exquisite disdain. there is always something ridiculous 
about the emotions of people whom one has ceased to love. 
sibyl vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic. 
her tears and sobs annoyed him. 
"i am going," he said at last in his calm clear voice. 
"i don't wish to be unkind, but i can't see you again. 
you have disappointed me." 
she wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer. 
her little hands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be 
seeking for him. he turned on his heel and left the room. 
in a few moments he was out of the theatre. 
where he went to he hardly knew. he remembered wandering through dimly 
lit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking houses. 
women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after him. 
drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves like 
monstrous apes. he had seen grotesque children huddled upon door-steps, and 
heard shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts. 
as the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to covent garden. 
the darkness lifted, and, flushed with faint fires, the sky hollowed itself 
into a perfect pearl. huge carts filled with nodding lilies rumbled slowly 
down the polished empty street. the air was heavy with the perfume of 
the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an anodyne for his pain. 
he followed into the market and watched the men unloading their waggons. 
a white-smocked carter offered him some cherries. he thanked him, 
wondered why he refused to accept any money for them, and began to eat 
them listlessly. they had been plucked at midnight, and the coldness 
of the moon had entered into them. a long line of boys carrying crates 
of striped tulips, and of yellow and red roses, defiled in front of him, 
threading their way through the huge, jade-green piles of vegetables. 
under the portico, with its grey, sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop 
of draggled bareheaded girls, waiting for the auction to be over. 
others crowded round the swinging doors of the coffee-house in the piazza. 
the heavy cart-horses slipped and stamped upon the rough stones, 
shaking their bells and trappings. some of the drivers were lying asleep 
on a pile of sacks. iris-necked and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about 
picking up seeds. 
after a little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home. 
for a few moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round 
at the silent square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows 
and its staring blinds. the sky was pure opal now, 
and the roofs of the houses glistened like silver against it. 
from some chimney opposite a thin wreath of smoke was rising. 
it curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air. 
in the huge gilt venetian lantern, spoil of some doge's barge, 
that hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall 
of entrance, lights were still burning from three flickering jets: 
thin blue petals of flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire. 
he turned them out and, having thrown his hat and cape on the table, 
passed through the library towards the door of his bedroom, 
a large octagonal chamber on the ground floor that, in his new-born 
feeling for luxury, he had just had decorated for himself and hung 
with some curious renaissance tapestries that had been discovered 
stored in a disused attic at selby royal. as he was turning 
the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait basil 
hallward had painted of him. he started back as if in surprise. 
then he went on into his own room, looking somewhat puzzled. 
after he had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed 
to hesitate. finally, he came back, went over to the picture, 
and examined it. in the dim arrested light that struggled 
through the cream-coloured silk blinds, the face appeared to him 
to be a little changed. the expression looked different. 
one would have said that there was a touch of cruelty in the mouth. 
it was certainly strange. 
he turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind. 
the bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic 
shadows into dusky corners, where they lay shuddering. 
but the strange expression that he had noticed in the face of 
the portrait seemed to linger there, to be more intensified even. 
the quivering ardent sunlight showed him the lines of cruelty round 
the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking into a mirror after 
he had done some dreadful thing. 
he winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed 
in ivory cupids, one of lord henry's many presents to him, 
glanced hurriedly into its polished depths. no line like that 
warped his red lips. what did it mean? 
he rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined it again. 
there were no signs of any change when he looked into the actual painting, 
and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression had altered. it was not 
a mere fancy of his own. the thing was horribly apparent. 
he threw himself into a chair and began to think. suddenly there flashed 
across his mind what he had said in basil hallward's studio the day 
the picture had been finished. yes, he remembered it perfectly. 
he had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, 
and the portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, 
and the face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; 
that the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering 
and thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness 
of his then just conscious boyhood. surely his wish had not been fulfilled? 
such things were impossible. it seemed monstrous even to think of them. 
and, yet, there was the picture before him, with the touch of cruelty in 
the mouth. 
cruelty! had he been cruel? it was the girl's fault, not his. 
he had dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her 
because he had thought her great. then she had disappointed him. 
she had been shallow and unworthy. and, yet, a feeling 
of infinite regret came over him, as he thought of her lying 
at his feet sobbing like a little child. he remembered with what 
callousness he had watched her. why had he been made like that? 
why had such a soul been given to him? but he had suffered also. 
during the three terrible hours that the play had lasted, 
he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of torture. 
his life was well worth hers. she had marred him for a moment, 
if he had wounded her for an age. besides, women were better 
suited to bear sorrow than men. they lived on their emotions. 
they only thought of their emotions. when they took lovers, 
it was merely to have some one with whom they could have scenes. 
lord henry had told him that, and lord henry knew what women were. 
why should he trouble about sibyl vane? she was nothing to him 
now. 
but the picture? what was he to say of that? it held the secret of his life, 
and told his story. it had taught him to love his own beauty. would it teach 
him to loathe his own soul? would he ever look at it again? 
no; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses. 
the horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it. 
suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck 
that makes men mad. the picture had not changed. it was folly to 
think so. 
yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel smile. 
its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight. its blue eyes met his own. 
a sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the painted image 
of himself, came over him. it had altered already, and would alter more. 
its gold would wither into grey. its red and white roses would die. 
for every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck and wreck its fairness. 
but he would not sin. the picture, changed or unchanged, would be 
to him the visible emblem of conscience. he would resist temptation. 
he would not see lord henry any more-would not, at any rate, 
listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in basil hallward's 
garden had first stirred within him the passion for impossible things. 
he would go back to sibyl vane, make her amends, marry her, try to love 
her again. yes, it was his duty to do so. she must have suffered 
more than he had. poor child! he had been selfish and cruel to her. 
the fascination that she had exercised over him would return. 
they would be happy together. his life with her would be beautiful and 
pure. 
he got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front 
of the portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it. "how horrible!" 
he murmured to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it. 
when he stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep breath. 
the fresh morning air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions. 
he thought only of sibyl. a faint echo of his love came back to him. 
he repeated her name over and over again. the birds that were 
singing in the dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers 
about her. 
chapter 8 
it was long past noon when he awoke. his valet had crept 
several times on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, 
and had wondered what made his young master sleep so late. 
finally his bell sounded, and victor came in softly with a cup 
of tea, and a pile of letters, on a small tray of old sevres china, 
and drew back the olive-satin curtains, with their shimmering 
blue lining, that hung in front of the three tall windows. 
"monsieur has well slept this morning," he said, smiling. 
"what o'clock is it, victor?" asked dorian gray drowsily. 
"one hour and a quarter, monsieur." 
how late it was! he sat up, and having sipped some tea, 
turned over his letters. one of them was from lord henry, and had 
been brought by hand that morning. he hesitated for a moment, 
and then put it aside. the others he opened listlessly. 
they contained the usual collection of cards, invitations to dinner, 
tickets for private views, programmes of charity concerts, 
and the like that are showered on fashionable young men every 
morning during the season. there was a rather heavy bill 
for a chased silver louis-quinze toilet-set that he had not 
yet had the courage to send on to his guardians, who were 
extremely old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live 
in an age when unnecessary things are our only necessities; 
and there were several very courteously worded communications 
from jermyn street money-lenders offering to advance any sum 
of money at a moment's notice and at the most reasonable rates 
of interest. 
after about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate dressing-gown 
of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the onyx-paved bathroom. 
the cool water refreshed him after his long sleep. he seemed to have 
forgotten all that he had gone through. a dim sense of having taken part 
in some strange tragedy came to him once or twice, but there was the unreality 
of a dream about it. 
as soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat 
down to a light french breakfast that had been laid out 
for him on a small round table close to the open window. 
it was an exquisite day. the warm air seemed laden with spices. 
a bee flew in and buzzed round the blue-dragon bowl that, 
filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before him. he felt 
perfectly happy. 
suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front 
of the portrait, and he started. 
"too cold for monsieur?" asked his valet, putting an omelette on the table. 
"i shut the window?" 
dorian shook his head. "i am not cold," he murmured. 
was it all true? had the portrait really changed? 
or had it been simply his own imagination that had made him 
see a look of evil where there had been a look of joy? 
surely a painted canvas could not alter? the thing was absurd. 
it would serve as a tale to tell basil some day. it would make 
him smile. 
and, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing! 
first in the dim twilight, and then in the bright dawn, 
he had seen the touch of cruelty round the warped lips. 
he almost dreaded his valet leaving the room. he knew that 
when he was alone he would have to examine the portrait. 
he was afraid of certainty. when the coffee and cigarettes 
had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire 
to tell him to remain. as the door was closing behind him, 
he called him back. the man stood waiting for his orders. 
dorian looked at him for a moment. "i am not at home 
to any one, victor," he said with a sigh. the man bowed 
and retired. 
then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung 
himself down on a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing 
the screen. the screen was an old one, of gilt spanish leather, 
stamped and wrought with a rather florid louis-quatorze pattern. 
he scanned it curiously, wondering if ever before it had concealed 
the secret of a man's life. 
should he move it aside, after all? why not let it stay there? 
what was the use of knowing? if the thing was true, 
it was terrible. if it was not true, why trouble about it? 
but what if, by some fate or deadlier chance, eyes other than 
his spied behind and saw the horrible change? what should he do 
if basil hallward came and asked to look at his own picture? 
basil would be sure to do that. no; the thing had to be examined, 
and at once. anything would be better than this dreadful state 
of doubt. 
he got up and locked both doors. at least he would be alone when he looked 
upon the mask of his shame. then he drew the screen aside and saw himself 
face to face. it was perfectly true. the portrait had altered. 
as he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, 
he found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling 
of almost scientific interest. that such a change should have 
taken place was incredible to him. and yet it was a fact. 
was there some subtle affinity between the chemical atoms that 
shaped themselves into form and colour on the canvas and the soul 
that was within him? could it be that what that soul thought, 
they realized?-that what it dreamed, they made true? 
or was there some other, more terrible reason? he shuddered, 
and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there, 
gazing at the picture in sickened horror. 
one thing, however, he felt that it had done for him. 
it had made him conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been 
to sibyl vane. it was not too late to make reparation for that. 
she could still be his wife. his unreal and selfish love 
would yield to some higher influence, would be transformed 
into some nobler passion, and the portrait that basil hallward 
had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, 
would be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience 
to others, and the fear of god to us all. there were opiates 
for remorse, drugs that could lull the moral sense to sleep. 
but here was a visible symbol of the degradation of sin. 
here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men brought upon 
their souls. 
three o'clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double chime, 
but dorian gray did not stir. he was trying to gather up the scarlet 
threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his way through 
the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was wandering. 
he did not know what to do, or what to think. finally, he went over 
to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had loved, 
imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness. he covered 
page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of pain. 
there is a luxury in self-reproach. when we blame ourselves, we feel that no 
one else has a right to blame us. it is the confession, not the priest, 
that gives us absolution. when dorian had finished the letter, he felt that 
he had been forgiven. 
suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard lord henry's 
voice outside. "my dear boy, i must see you. let me in at once. 
i can't bear your shutting yourself up like this." 
he made no answer at first, but remained quite still. 
the knocking still continued and grew louder. yes, it was 
better to let lord henry in, and to explain to him the new 
life he was going to lead, to quarrel with him if it became 
necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was inevitable. 
he jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture, 
and unlocked the door. 
"i am so sorry for it all, dorian," said lord henry as he entered. 
"but you must not think too much about it." 
"do you mean about sibyl vane?" asked the lad. 
"yes, of course," answered lord henry, sinking into a chair 
and slowly pulling off his yellow gloves. "it is dreadful, 
from one point of view, but it was not your fault. tell me, 
did you go behind and see her, after the play was over?" 
"yes." 
"i felt sure you had. did you make a scene with her?" 
"i was brutal, harry-perfectly brutal. but it is all right now. 
i am not sorry for anything that has happened. it has taught me to know 
myself better." 
"ah, dorian, i am so glad you take it in that way! i was afraid i 
would find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair 
of yours." 
"i have got through all that," said dorian, shaking his head and smiling. 
"i am perfectly happy now. i know what conscience is, to begin with. 
it is not what you told me it was. it is the divinest thing in us. 
don't sneer at it, harry, any more-at least not before me. i want to 
be good. i can't bear the idea of my soul being hideous." 
"a very charming artistic basis for ethics, dorian! i congratulate you 
on it. but how are you going to begin?" 
"by marrying sibyl vane." 
"marrying sibyl vane!" cried lord henry, standing up and looking 
at him in perplexed amazement. "but, my dear dorian-" 
"yes, harry, i know what you are going to say. something dreadful 
about marriage. don't say it. don't ever say things of that 
kind to me again. two days ago i asked sibyl to marry me. 
i am not going to break my word to her. she is to be my wife." 
"your wife! dorian! . . . didn't you get my letter? 
i wrote to you this morning, and sent the note down by my 
own man." 
"your letter? oh, yes, i remember. i have not read it yet, harry. 
i was afraid there might be something in it that i wouldn't like. 
you cut life to pieces with your epigrams." 
"you know nothing then?" 
"what do you mean?" 
lord henry walked across the room, and sitting down by dorian gray, 
took both his hands in his own and held them tightly. "dorian," he said, 
"my letter-don't be frightened-was to tell you that sibyl vane 
is dead." 
a cry of pain broke from the lad's lips, and he leaped to his feet, 
tearing his hands away from lord henry's grasp. "dead! sibyl dead! 
it is not true! it is a horrible lie! how dare you say it?" 
"it is quite true, dorian," said lord henry, gravely. "it is in 
all the morning papers. i wrote down to you to ask you not to see 
any one till i came. there will have to be an inquest, of course, 
and you must not be mixed up in it. things like that make a man 
fashionable in paris. but in london people are so prejudiced. 
here, one should never make one's debut with a scandal. 
one should reserve that to give an interest to one's old age. 
i suppose they don't know your name at the theatre? if they don't, 
it is all right. did any one see you going round to her room? 
that is an important point." 
dorian did not answer for a few moments. he was dazed with horror. 
finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, "harry, did you say an inquest? 
what did you mean by that? did sibyl-? oh, harry, i can't bear it! 
but be quick. tell me everything at once." 
"i have no doubt it was not an accident, dorian, though it 
must be put in that way to the public. it seems that as she 
was leaving the theatre with her mother, about half-past 
twelve or so, she said she had forgotten something upstairs. 
they waited some time for her, but she did not come down again. 
they ultimately found her lying dead on the floor of her 
dressing-room. she had swallowed something by mistake, 
some dreadful thing they use at theatres. i don't know what 
it was, but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it. 
i should fancy it was prussic acid, as she seems to have 
died instantaneously." 
"harry, harry, it is terrible!" cried the lad. 
"yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself 
mixed up in it. i see by the standard that she was seventeen. 
i should have thought she was almost younger than that. 
she looked such a child, and seemed to know so little about acting. 
dorian, you mustn't let this thing get on your nerves. 
you must come and dine with me, and afterwards we will look in at 
the opera. it is a patti night, and everybody will be there. 
you can come to my sister's box. she has got some smart women 
with her." 
"so i have murdered sibyl vane," said dorian gray, half to himself, 
"murdered her as surely as if i had cut her little throat 
with a knife. yet the roses are not less lovely for all that. 
the birds sing just as happily in my garden. and to-night i am 
to dine with you, and then go on to the opera, and sup somewhere, 
i suppose, afterwards. how extraordinarily dramatic life is! 
if i had read all this in a book, harry, i think i would have 
wept over it. somehow, now that it has happened actually, 
and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears. 
here is the first passionate love-letter i have ever written 
in my life. strange, that my first passionate love-letter should 
have been addressed to a dead girl. can they feel, i wonder, 
those white silent people we call the dead? sibyl! can she feel, 
or know, or listen? oh, harry, how i loved her once! 
it seems years ago to me now. she was everything to me. 
then came that dreadful night-was it really only last night?- 
when she played so badly, and my heart almost broke. 
she explained it all to me. it was terribly pathetic. 
but i was not moved a bit. i thought her shallow. 
suddenly something happened that made me afraid. 
i can't tell you what it was, but it was terrible. 
i said i would go back to her. i felt i had done wrong. 
and now she is dead. my god! my god! harry, what shall i do? 
you don't know the danger i am in, and there is nothing 
to keep me straight. she would have done that for me. 
she had no right to kill herself. it was selfish of 
her." 
"my dear dorian," answered lord henry, taking a cigarette 
from his case and producing a gold-latten matchbox, 
"the only way a woman can ever reform a man is by boring him 
so completely that he loses all possible interest in life. 
if you had married this girl, you would have been wretched. 
of course, you would have treated her kindly. one can always 
be kind to people about whom one cares nothing. but she would 
have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent 
to her. and when a woman finds that out about her husband, 
she either becomes dreadfully dowdy, or wears very smart 
bonnets that some other woman's husband has to pay for. 
i say nothing about the social mistake, which would have 
been abject-which, of course, i would not have allowed- 
but i assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an 
absolute failure." 
"i suppose it would," muttered the lad, walking up and down the room 
and looking horribly pale. "but i thought it was my duty. 
it is not my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing 
what was right. i remember your saying once that there is a fatality 
about good resolutions-that they are always made too late. 
mine certainly were." 
"good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere 
with scientific laws. their origin is pure vanity. 
their result is absolutely nil. they give us, now and then, 
some of those luxurious sterile emotions that have a certain 
charm for the weak. that is all that can be said for them. 
they are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they have 
no account." 
"harry," cried dorian gray, coming over and sitting down beside him, 
"why is it that i cannot feel this tragedy as much as i want to? 
i don't think i am heartless. do you?" 
"you have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight 
to be entitled to give yourself that name, dorian," answered lord 
henry with his sweet melancholy smile. 
the lad frowned. "i don't like that explanation, harry," he rejoined, 
"but i am glad you don't think i am heartless. i am nothing of the kind. 
i know i am not. and yet i must admit that this thing that has happened 
does not affect me as it should. it seems to me to be simply like a 
wonderful ending to a wonderful play. it has all the terrible beauty 
of a greek tragedy, a tragedy in which i took a great part, but by which i 
have not been wounded." 
"it is an interesting question," said lord henry, who found 
an exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad's unconscious egotism, 
"an extremely interesting question. i fancy that the true 
explanation is this: it often happens that the real tragedies 
of life occur in such an inartistic manner that they hurt 
us by their crude violence, their absolute incoherence, 
their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack of style. 
they affect us just as vulgarity affects us. they give us 
an impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that. 
sometimes, however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements 
of beauty crosses our lives. if these elements of beauty are real, 
the whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect. 
suddenly we find that we are no longer the actors, 
but the spectators of the play. or rather we are both. 
we watch ourselves, and the mere wonder of the spectacle 
enthralls us. in the present case, what is it that has 
really happened? some one has killed herself for love of you. 
i wish that i had ever had such an experience. it would 
have made me in love with love for the rest of my life. 
the people who have adored me-there have not been very many, 
but there have been some-have always insisted on living on, 
long after i had ceased to care for them, or they to care for me. 
they have become stout and tedious, and when i meet them, 
they go in at once for reminiscences. that awful memory of woman! 
what a fearful thing it is! and what an utter intellectual 
stagnation it reveals! one should absorb the colour of life, 
but one should never remember its details. details are always 
vulgar." 
"i must sow poppies in my garden," sighed dorian. 
"there is no necessity," rejoined his companion. "life has always 
poppies in her hands. of course, now and then things linger. 
i once wore nothing but violets all through one season, 
as a form of artistic mourning for a romance that would not die. 
ultimately, however, it did die. i forget what killed it. 
i think it was her proposing to sacrifice the whole world for me. 
that is always a dreadful moment. it fills one with the terror 
of eternity. well-would you believe it?-a week ago, 
at lady hampshire's, i found myself seated at dinner next 
the lady in question, and she insisted on going over the whole 
thing again, and digging up the past, and raking up the future. 
i had buried my romance in a bed of asphodel. she dragged 
it out again and assured me that i had spoiled her life. 
i am bound to state that she ate an enormous dinner, so i did 
not feel any anxiety. but what a lack of taste she showed! 
the one charm of the past is that it is the past. 
but women never know when the curtain has fallen. 
they always want a sixth act, and as soon as the interest 
of the play is entirely over, they propose to continue it. 
if they were allowed their own way, every comedy would have 
a tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in a farce. 
they are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of art. 
you are more fortunate than i am. i assure you, dorian, that not 
one of the women i have known would have done for me what sibyl 
vane did for you. ordinary women always console themselves. 
some of them do it by going in for sentimental colours. 
never trust a woman who wears mauve, whatever her age may be, 
or a woman over thirty-five who is fond of pink ribbons. 
it always means that they have a history. others find 
a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good qualities 
of their husbands. they flaunt their conjugal felicity 
in one's face, as if it were the most fascinating of sins. 
religion consoles some. its mysteries have all the charm 
of a flirtation, a woman once told me, and i can quite 
understand it. besides, nothing makes one so vain as being told 
that one is a sinner. conscience makes egotists of us all. 
yes; there is really no end to the consolations that women find 
in modern life. indeed, i have not mentioned the most important 
one." 
"what is that, harry?" said the lad listlessly. 
"oh, the obvious consolation. taking some one else's admirer when one 
loses one's own. in good society that always whitewashes a woman. 
but really, dorian, how different sibyl vane must have been from all the women 
one meets! there is something to me quite beautiful about her death. 
i am glad i am living in a century when such wonders happen. 
they make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with, 
such as romance, passion, and love." 
"i was terribly cruel to her. you forget that." 
"i am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty, 
more than anything else. they have wonderfully primitive instincts. 
we have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their masters, 
all the same. they love being dominated. i am sure you were splendid. 
i have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but i can fancy how 
delightful you looked. and, after all, you said something to me the day 
before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely fanciful, 
but that i see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key 
to everything." 
"what was that, harry?" 
"you said to me that sibyl vane represented to you all the heroines 
of romance-that she was desdemona one night, and ophelia the other; 
that if she died as juliet, she came to life as imogen." 
"she will never come to life again now," muttered the lad, 
burying his face in his hands. 
"no, she will never come to life. she has played her last part. 
but you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room 
simply as a strange lurid fragment from some jacobean tragedy, 
as a wonderful scene from webster, or ford, or cyril tourneur. 
the girl never really lived, and so she has never really died. 
to you at least she was always a dream, a phantom that flitted 
through shakespeare's plays and left them lovelier for its presence, 
a reed through which shakespeare's music sounded richer and more 
full of joy. the moment she touched actual life, she marred it, 
and it marred her, and so she passed away. mourn for ophelia, 
if you like. put ashes on your head because cordelia was strangled. 
cry out against heaven because the daughter of brabantio died. 
but don't waste your tears over sibyl vane. she was less real than they 
are." 
there was a silence. the evening darkened in the room. 
noiselessly, and with silver feet, the shadows crept in from 
the garden. the colours faded wearily out of things. 
after some time dorian gray looked up. "you have explained me 
to myself, harry," he murmured with something of a sigh of relief. 
"i felt all that you have said, but somehow i was afraid of it, 
and i could not express it to myself. how well you know me! 
but we will not talk again of what has happened. it has been 
a marvellous experience. that is all. i wonder if life has still 
in store for me anything as marvellous." 
"life has everything in store for you, dorian. there is nothing that you, 
with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do." 
"but suppose, harry, i became haggard, and old, and wrinkled? 
what then?" 
"ah, then," said lord henry, rising to go, "then, my dear dorian, 
you would have to fight for your victories. as it is, 
they are brought to you. no, you must keep your good looks. 
we live in an age that reads too much to be wise, and that 
thinks too much to be beautiful. we cannot spare you. 
and now you had better dress and drive down to the club. 
we are rather late, as it is." 
"i think i shall join you at the opera, harry. i feel too tired 
to eat anything. what is the number of your sister's box?" 
"twenty-seven, i believe. it is on the grand tier. 
you will see her name on the door. but i am sorry you won't 
come and dine." 
"i don't feel up to it," said dorian listlessly. "but i am 
awfully obliged to you for all that you have said to me. 
you are certainly my best friend. no one has ever understood me 
as you have." 
"we are only at the beginning of our friendship, dorian," answered lord henry, 
shaking him by the hand. "good-bye. i shall see you before nine-thirty, 
i hope. remember, patti is singing." 
as he closed the door behind him, dorian gray touched the bell, 
and in a few minutes victor appeared with the lamps and drew 
the blinds down. he waited impatiently for him to go. 
the man seemed to take an interminable time over everything. 
as soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew it back. 
no; there was no further change in the picture. it had received 
the news of sibyl vane's death before he had known of it himself. 
it was conscious of the events of life as they occurred. 
the vicious cruelty that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, 
no doubt, appeared at the very moment that the girl had drunk 
the poison, whatever it was. or was it indifferent to results? 
did it merely take cognizance of what passed within the soul? 
he wondered, and hoped that some day he would see the change taking place 
before his very eyes, shuddering as he hoped it. 
poor sibyl! what a romance it had all been! she had often mimicked 
death on the stage. then death himself had touched her and taken 
her with him. how had she played that dreadful last scene? 
had she cursed him, as she died? no; she had died for love of him, 
and love would always be a sacrament to him now. she had atoned 
for everything by the sacrifice she had made of her life. 
he would not think any more of what she had made him go through, 
on that horrible night at the theatre. when he thought of her, 
it would be as a wonderful tragic figure sent on to the world's stage 
to show the supreme reality of love. a wonderful tragic figure? 
tears came to his eyes as he remembered her childlike look, and winsome 
fanciful ways, and shy tremulous grace. he brushed them away hastily and 
looked again at the picture. 
he felt that the time had really come for making his choice. 
or had his choice already been made? yes, life had decided 
that for him-life, and his own infinite curiosity about life. 
eternal youth, infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, 
wild joys and wilder sins-he was to have all these things. 
the portrait was to bear the burden of his shame: 
that was all. 
a feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration 
that was in store for the fair face on the canvas. once, in boyish 
mockery of narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, 
those painted lips that now smiled so cruelly at him. 
morning after morning he had sat before the portrait wondering at 
its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as it seemed to him at times. 
was it to alter now with every mood to which he yielded? 
was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to be hidden 
away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that had 
so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair? 
the pity of it! the pity of it! 
for a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy 
that existed between him and the picture might cease. 
it had changed in answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer 
it might remain unchanged. and yet, who, that knew anything 
about life, would surrender the chance of remaining always young, 
however fantastic that chance might be, or with what fateful consequences 
it might be fraught? besides, was it really under his control? 
had it indeed been prayer that had produced the substitution? 
might there not be some curious scientific reason for it all? 
if thought could exercise its influence upon a living organism, 
might not thought exercise an influence upon dead and inorganic things? 
nay, without thought or conscious desire, might not things external 
to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods and passions, 
atom calling to atom in secret love or strange affinity? 
but the reason was of no importance. he would never again tempt 
by a prayer any terrible power. if the picture was to alter, 
it was to alter. that was all. why inquire too closely 
into it? 
for there would be a real pleasure in watching it. 
he would be able to follow his mind into its secret places. 
this portrait would be to him the most magical of mirrors. 
as it had revealed to him his own body, so it would reveal 
to him his own soul. and when winter came upon it, he would 
still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of summer. 
when the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid mask 
of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood. 
not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade. not one pulse 
of his life would ever weaken. like the gods of the greeks, 
he would be strong, and fleet, and joyous. what did it matter what 
happened to the coloured image on the canvas? he would be safe. 
that was everything. 
he drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture, 
smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was 
already waiting for him. an hour later he was at the opera, and lord 
henry was leaning over his chair. 
chapter 9 
as he was sitting at breakfast next morning, basil hallward was shown 
into the room. 
"i am so glad i have found you, dorian," he said gravely. 
"i called last night, and they told me you were at the opera. 
of course, i knew that was impossible. but i wish you had left 
word where you had really gone to. i passed a dreadful evening, 
half afraid that one tragedy might be followed by another. 
i think you might have telegraphed for me when you heard of it first. 
i read of it quite by chance in a late edition of the globe 
that i picked up at the club. i came here at once and was 
miserable at not finding you. i can't tell you how heart-broken 
i am about the whole thing. i know what you must suffer. 
but where were you? did you go down and see the girl's mother? 
for a moment i thought of following you there. they gave 
the address in the paper. somewhere in the euston road, isn't it? 
but i was afraid of intruding upon a sorrow that i could 
not lighten. poor woman! what a state she must be in! 
and her only child, too! what did she say about it 
all?" 
"my dear basil, how do i know?" murmured dorian gray, sipping some 
pale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded bubble of venetian 
glass and looking dreadfully bored. "i was at the opera. 
you should have come on there. i met lady gwendolen, harry's sister, 
for the first time. we were in her box. she is perfectly charming; 
and patti sang divinely. don't talk about horrid subjects. 
if one doesn't talk about a thing, it has never happened. 
it is simply expression, as harry says, that gives reality to things. 
i may mention that she was not the woman's only child. there is 
a son, a charming fellow, i believe. but he is not on the stage. 
he is a sailor, or something. and now, tell me about yourself and what you 
are painting." 
"you went to the opera?" said hallward, speaking very slowly 
and with a strained touch of pain in his voice. "you went to 
the opera while sibyl vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging? 
you can talk to me of other women being charming, and of patti 
singing divinely, before the girl you loved has even the quiet 
of a grave to sleep in? why, man, there are horrors in store 
for that little white body of hers!" 
"stop, basil! i won't hear it!" cried dorian, leaping to his feet. 
"you must not tell me about things. what is done is done. 
what is past is past." 
"you call yesterday the past?" 
"what has the actual lapse of time got to do with it? it is 
only shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion. 
a man who is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can 
invent a pleasure. i don't want to be at the mercy of my emotions. 
i want to use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them." 
"dorian, this is horrible! something has changed you completely. 
you look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, 
used to come down to my studio to sit for his picture. 
but you were simple, natural, and affectionate then. 
you were the most unspoiled creature in the whole world. 
now, i don't know what has come over you. you talk as if you 
had no heart, no pity in you. it is all harry's influence. 
i see that." 
the lad flushed up and, going to the window, looked out for 
a few moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden. 
"i owe a great deal to harry, basil," he said at last, 
"more than i owe to you. you only taught me to be vain." 
"well, i am punished for that, dorian-or shall be some day." 
"i don't know what you mean, basil," he exclaimed, turning round. 
"i don't know what you want. what do you want?" 
"i want the dorian gray i used to paint," said the artist sadly. 
"basil," said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand 
on his shoulder, "you have come too late. yesterday, when i 
heard that sibyl vane had killed herself-" 
"killed herself! good heavens! is there no doubt about that?" 
cried hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror. 
"my dear basil! surely you don't think it was a vulgar accident? 
of course she killed herself." 
the elder man buried his face in his hands. "how fearful," 
he muttered, and a shudder ran through him. 
"no," said dorian gray, "there is nothing fearful about it. 
it is one of the great romantic tragedies of the age. 
as a rule, people who act lead the most commonplace lives. 
they are good husbands, or faithful wives, or something tedious. 
you know what i mean-middle-class virtue and all that kind of thing. 
how different sibyl was! she lived her finest tragedy. 
she was always a heroine. the last night she played- 
the night you saw her-she acted badly because she had known 
the reality of love. when she knew its unreality, she died, 
as juliet might have died. she passed again into the sphere of art. 
there is something of the martyr about her. her death has all 
the pathetic uselessness of martyrdom, all its wasted beauty. 
but, as i was saying, you must not think i have not suffered. 
if you had come in yesterday at a particular moment- 
about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to six- 
you would have found me in tears. even harry, who was here, 
who brought me the news, in fact, had no idea what i was 
going through. i suffered immensely. then it passed away. 
i cannot repeat an emotion. no one can, except sentimentalists. 
and you are awfully unjust, basil. you come down here to console me. 
that is charming of you. you find me consoled, and you are furious. 
how like a sympathetic person! you remind me of a story 
harry told me about a certain philanthropist who spent twenty 
years of his life in trying to get some grievance redressed, 
or some unjust law altered-i forget exactly what it was. 
finally he succeeded, and nothing could exceed his disappointment. 
he had absolutely nothing to do, almost died of ennui, and became 
a confirmed misanthrope. and besides, my dear old basil, 
if you really want to console me, teach me rather to forget what 
has happened, or to see it from a proper artistic point of view. 
was it not gautier who used to write about la consolation des arts? 
i remember picking up a little vellum-covered book in your 
studio one day and chancing on that delightful phrase. 
well, i am not like that young man you told me of when we 
were down at marlow together, the young man who used to say 
that yellow satin could console one for all the miseries of life. 
i love beautiful things that one can touch and handle. 
old brocades, green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories, 
exquisite surroundings, luxury, pomp-there is much to be got 
from all these. but the artistic temperament that they create, 
or at any rate reveal, is still more to me. to become 
the spectator of one's own life, as harry says, is to escape 
the suffering of life. i know you are surprised at my talking 
to you like this. you have not realized how i have developed. 
i was a schoolboy when you knew me. i am a man now. 
i have new passions, new thoughts, new ideas. i am different, 
but you must not like me less. i am changed, but you must 
always be my friend. of course, i am very fond of harry. 
but i know that you are better than he is. you are not stronger- 
you are too much afraid of life-but you are better. and how 
happy we used to be together! don't leave me, basil, and don't 
quarrel with me. i am what i am. there is nothing more to be 
said." 
the painter felt strangely moved. the lad was infinitely dear to him, 
and his personality had been the great turning point in his art. 
he could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more. after all, 
his indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away. 
there was so much in him that was good, so much in him that 
was noble. 
"well, dorian," he said at length, with a sad smile, "i 
won't speak to you again about this horrible thing, after to-day. 
i only trust your name won't be mentioned in connection with it. 
the inquest is to take place this afternoon. have they summoned you?" 
dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face 
at the mention of the word "inquest." there was something so crude 
and vulgar about everything of the kind. "they don't know my name," 
he answered. 
"but surely she did?" 
"only my christian name, and that i am quite sure she never mentioned 
to any one. she told me once that they were all rather curious to learn 
who i was, and that she invariably told them my name was prince charming. 
it was pretty of her. you must do me a drawing of sibyl, basil. 
i should like to have something more of her than the memory of a few kisses 
and some broken pathetic words." 
"i will try and do something, dorian, if it would please you. 
but you must come and sit to me yourself again. i can't get on 
without you." 
"i can never sit to you again, basil. it is impossible!" 
he exclaimed, starting back. 
the painter stared at him. "my dear boy, what nonsense!" 
he cried. "do you mean to say you don't like what i did of you? 
where is it? why have you pulled the screen in front of it? 
let me look at it. it is the best thing i have ever done. 
do take the screen away, dorian. it is simply disgraceful 
of your servant hiding my work like that. i felt the room looked 
different as i came in." 
"my servant has nothing to do with it, basil. you don't imagine i let 
him arrange my room for me? he settles my flowers for me sometimes- 
that is all. no; i did it myself. the light was too strong on 
the portrait." 
"too strong! surely not, my dear fellow? it is an admirable place for it. 
let me see it." and hallward walked towards the corner of the room. 
a cry of terror broke from dorian gray's lips, and he rushed 
between the painter and the screen. "basil," he said, 
looking very pale, "you must not look at it. i don't wish 
you to." 
"not look at my own work! you are not serious. why shouldn't i look at it?" 
exclaimed hallward, laughing. 
"if you try to look at it, basil, on my word of honour i will 
never speak to you again as long as i live. i am quite serious. 
i don't offer any explanation, and you are not to ask for any. 
but, remember, if you touch this screen, everything is over 
between us." 
hallward was thunderstruck. he looked at dorian gray in 
absolute amazement. he had never seen him like this before. 
the lad was actually pallid with rage. his hands were clenched, 
and the pupils of his eyes were like disks of blue fire. 
he was trembling all over. 
"dorian!" 
"don't speak!" 
"but what is the matter? of course i won't look at it if you don't want 
me to," he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over towards 
the window. "but, really, it seems rather absurd that i shouldn't see my 
own work, especially as i am going to exhibit it in paris in the autumn. 
i shall probably have to give it another coat of varnish before that, so i 
must see it some day, and why not to-day?" 
"to exhibit it! you want to exhibit it?" exclaimed dorian gray, 
a strange sense of terror creeping over him. was the world going to be 
shown his secret? were people to gape at the mystery of his life? 
that was impossible. something-he did not know what-had to be done 
at once. 
"yes; i don't suppose you will object to that. georges petit 
is going to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition 
in the rue de seze, which will open the first week in october. 
the portrait will only be away a month. i should think you could easily 
spare it for that time. in fact, you are sure to be out of town. 
and if you keep it always behind a screen, you can't care much 
about it." 
dorian gray passed his hand over his forehead. there were beads of 
perspiration there. he felt that he was on the brink of a horrible danger. 
"you told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it," he cried. 
"why have you changed your mind? you people who go in for being consistent 
have just as many moods as others have. the only difference is that 
your moods are rather meaningless. you can't have forgotten that you 
assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world would induce you 
to send it to any exhibition. you told harry exactly the same thing." 
he stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into his eyes. he remembered 
that lord henry had said to him once, half seriously and half in jest, 
"if you want to have a strange quarter of an hour, get basil to tell you 
why he won't exhibit your picture. he told me why he wouldn't, and it 
was a revelation to me." yes, perhaps basil, too, had his secret. 
he would ask him and try. 
"basil," he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight 
in the face, "we have each of us a secret. let me know yours, 
and i shall tell you mine. what was your reason for refusing 
to exhibit my picture?" 
the painter shuddered in spite of himself. "dorian, if i told you, 
you might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh 
at me. i could not bear your doing either of those two things. 
if you wish me never to look at your picture again, i am content. 
i have always you to look at. if you wish the best work i have ever done 
to be hidden from the world, i am satisfied. your friendship is dearer 
to me than any fame or reputation." 
"no, basil, you must tell me," insisted dorian gray. 
"i think i have a right to know." his feeling of terror 
had passed away, and curiosity had taken its place. 
he was determined to find out basil hallward's mystery. 
"let us sit down, dorian," said the painter, looking troubled. 
"let us sit down. and just answer me one question. 
have you noticed in the picture something curious?-something that 
probably at first did not strike you, but that revealed itself 
to you suddenly?" 
"basil!" cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling 
hands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes. 
"i see you did. don't speak. wait till you hear what i have to say. 
dorian, from the moment i met you, your personality had the most 
extraordinary influence over me. i was dominated, soul, brain, and power, 
by you. you became to me the visible incarnation of that unseen 
ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite dream. 
i worshipped you. i grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke. 
i wanted to have you all to myself. i was only happy when i 
was with you. when you were away from me, you were still present 
in my art.... of course, i never let you know anything about this. 
it would have been impossible. you would not have understood it. 
i hardly understood it myself. i only knew that i had seen perfection 
face to face, and that the world had become wonderful to my eyes- 
too wonderful, perhaps, for in such mad worships there is peril, 
the peril of losing them, no less than the peril of keeping them.... 
weeks and weeks went on, and i grew more and more absorbed in you. 
then came a new development. i had drawn you as paris in 
dainty armour, and as adonis with huntsman's cloak and polished 
boar-spear. crowned with heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on 
the prow of adrian's barge, gazing across the green turbid nile. 
you had leaned over the still pool of some greek woodland and seen 
in the water's silent silver the marvel of your own face. 
and it had all been what art should be-unconscious, ideal, and remote. 
one day, a fatal day i sometimes think, i determined to paint 
a wonderful portrait of you as you actually are, not in the costume 
of dead ages, but in your own dress and in your own time. 
whether it was the realism of the method, or the mere wonder 
of your own personality, thus directly presented to me without 
mist or veil, i cannot tell. but i know that as i worked at it, 
every flake and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret. 
i grew afraid that others would know of my idolatry. i felt, dorian, 
that i had told too much, that i had put too much of myself into it. 
then it was that i resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited. 
you were a little annoyed; but then you did not realize all that it 
meant to me. harry, to whom i talked about it, laughed at me. 
but i did not mind that. when the picture was finished, and i sat 
alone with it, i felt that i was right.... well, after a few days 
the thing left my studio, and as soon as i had got rid of the intolerable 
fascination of its presence, it seemed to me that i had been foolish 
in imagining that i had seen anything in it, more than that you 
were extremely good-looking and that i could paint. even now i 
cannot help feeling that it is a mistake to think that the passion 
one feels in creation is ever really shown in the work one creates. 
art is always more abstract than we fancy. form and colour tell 
us of form and colour-that is all. it often seems to me that art 
conceals the artist far more completely than it ever reveals him. 
and so when i got this offer from paris, i determined to make your 
portrait the principal thing in my exhibition. it never occurred 
to me that you would refuse. i see now that you were right. 
the picture cannot be shown. you must not be angry with me, dorian, 
for what i have told you. as i said to harry, once, you are made to be 
worshipped." 
dorian gray drew a long breath. the colour came back to his cheeks, 
and a smile played about his lips. the peril was over. 
he was safe for the time. yet he could not help feeling 
infinite pity for the painter who had just made this strange 
confession to him, and wondered if he himself would ever 
be so dominated by the personality of a friend. lord henry 
had the charm of being very dangerous. but that was all. 
he was too clever and too cynical to be really fond of. 
would there ever be some one who would fill him with a 
strange idolatry? was that one of the things that life had 
in store? 
"it is extraordinary to me, dorian," said hallward, "that you 
should have seen this in the portrait. did you really see it?" 
"i saw something in it," he answered, "something that seemed 
to me very curious." 
"well, you don't mind my looking at the thing now?" 
dorian shook his head. "you must not ask me that, basil. 
i could not possibly let you stand in front of that picture." 
"you will some day, surely?" 
"never." 
"well, perhaps you are right. and now good-bye, dorian. 
you have been the one person in my life who has really influenced 
my art. whatever i have done that is good, i owe to you. 
ah! you don't know what it cost me to tell you all that i have 
told you." 
"my dear basil," said dorian, "what have you told me? 
simply that you felt that you admired me too much. 
that is not even a compliment." 
"it was not intended as a compliment. it was a confession. 
now that i have made it, something seems to have gone out of me. 
perhaps one should never put one's worship into words." 
"it was a very disappointing confession." 
"why, what did you expect, dorian? you didn't see anything else 
in the picture, did you? there was nothing else to see?" 
"no; there was nothing else to see. why do you ask? 
but you mustn't talk about worship. it is foolish. you and i 
are friends, basil, and we must always remain so." 
"you have got harry," said the painter sadly. 
"oh, harry!" cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter. "harry spends 
his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing 
what is improbable. just the sort of life i would like to lead. 
but still i don't think i would go to harry if i were in trouble. 
i would sooner go to you, basil." 
"you will sit to me again?" 
"impossible!" 
"you spoil my life as an artist by refusing, dorian. no man 
comes across two ideal things. few come across one." 
"i can't explain it to you, basil, but i must never sit to you again. 
there is something fatal about a portrait. it has a life of its own. 
i will come and have tea with you. that will be just as pleasant." 
"pleasanter for you, i am afraid," murmured hallward regretfully. 
"and now good-bye. i am sorry you won't let me look at the picture 
once again. but that can't be helped. i quite understand what you feel 
about it." 
as he left the room, dorian gray smiled to himself. poor basil! 
how little he knew of the true reason! and how strange it 
was that, instead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, 
he had succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from 
his friend! how much that strange confession explained to him! 
the painter's absurd fits of jealousy, his wild devotion, 
his extravagant panegyrics, his curious reticences- 
he understood them all now, and he felt sorry. there seemed 
to him to be something tragic in a friendship so coloured 
by romance. 
he sighed and touched the bell. the portrait must be hidden away 
at all costs. he could not run such a risk of discovery again. 
it had been mad of him to have allowed the thing to remain, 
even for an hour, in a room to which any of his friends 
had access. 
chapter 10 
when his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly 
and wondered if he had thought of peering behind the screen. 
the man was quite impassive and waited for his orders. dorian lit 
a cigarette and walked over to the glass and glanced into it. 
he could see the reflection of victor's face perfectly. 
it was like a placid mask of servility. there was nothing 
to be afraid of, there. yet he thought it best to be on 
his guard. 
speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he wanted 
to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to send two of his 
men round at once. it seemed to him that as the man left the room his eyes 
wandered in the direction of the screen. or was that merely his own fancy? 
after a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned thread 
mittens on her wrinkled hands, mrs. leaf bustled into the library. 
he asked her for the key of the schoolroom. 
"the old schoolroom, mr. dorian?" she exclaimed. "why, it is full of dust. 
i must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it. it is not fit 
for you to see, sir. it is not, indeed." 
"i don't want it put straight, leaf. i only want the key." 
"well, sir, you'll be covered with cobwebs if you go into it. why, it hasn't 
been opened for nearly five years-not since his lordship died." 
he winced at the mention of his grandfather. he had hateful memories of him. 
"that does not matter," he answered. "i simply want to see the place- 
that is all. give me the key." 
"and here is the key, sir," said the old lady, going over 
the contents of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands. 
"here is the key. i'll have it off the bunch in a moment. 
but you don't think of living up there, sir, and you so 
comfortable here?" 
"no, no," he cried petulantly. "thank you, leaf. that will do." 
she lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some detail 
of the household. he sighed and told her to manage things as she 
thought best. she left the room, wreathed in smiles. 
as the door closed, dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round 
the room. his eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily 
embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century 
venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near bologna. 
yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in. it had perhaps 
served often as a pall for the dead. now it was to hide something that 
had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death itself- 
something that would breed horrors and yet would never die. what the worm 
was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image on the canvas. 
they would mar its beauty and eat away its grace. they would defile 
it and make it shameful. and yet the thing would still live on. 
it would be always alive. 
he shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told 
basil the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away. 
basil would have helped him to resist lord henry's influence, 
and the still more poisonous influences that came from his 
own temperament. the love that he bore him-for it was really love- 
had nothing in it that was not noble and intellectual. 
it was not that mere physical admiration of beauty that is born 
of the senses and that dies when the senses tire. it was such 
love as michelangelo had known, and montaigne, and winckelmann, 
and shakespeare himself. yes, basil could have saved him. 
but it was too late now. the past could always be annihilated. 
regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that. but the future 
was inevitable. there were passions in him that would find 
their terrible outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their 
evil real. 
he took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that 
covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen. 
was the face on the canvas viler than before? it seemed to him 
that it was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified. 
gold hair, blue eyes, and rose-red lips-they all were there. 
it was simply the expression that had altered. that was horrible 
in its cruelty. compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, 
how shallow basil's reproaches about sibyl vane had been!- 
how shallow, and of what little account! his own soul was looking 
out at him from the canvas and calling him to judgement. a look 
of pain came across him, and he flung the rich pall over the picture. 
as he did so, a knock came to the door. he passed out as his 
servant entered. 
"the persons are here, monsieur." 
he felt that the man must be got rid of at once. he must 
not be allowed to know where the picture was being taken to. 
there was something sly about him, and he had thoughtful, 
treacherous eyes. sitting down at the writing-table he scribbled 
a note to lord henry, asking him to send him round something 
to read and reminding him that they were to meet at eight-fifteen 
that evening. 
"wait for an answer," he said, handing it to him, "and show the men in here." 
in two or three minutes there was another knock, and mr. hubbard himself, 
the celebrated frame-maker of south audley street, came in with a 
somewhat rough-looking young assistant. mr. hubbard was a florid, 
red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was considerably tempered 
by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the artists who dealt with him. 
as a rule, he never left his shop. he waited for people to come to him. 
but he always made an exception in favour of dorian gray. there was 
something about dorian that charmed everybody. it was a pleasure even to 
see him. 
"what can i do for you, mr. gray?" he said, rubbing his fat freckled hands. 
"i thought i would do myself the honour of coming round in person. i have 
just got a beauty of a frame, sir. picked it up at a sale. old florentine. 
came from fonthill, i believe. admirably suited for a religious subject, 
mr. gray." 
"i am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming round, 
mr. hubbard. i shall certainly drop in and look at the frame- 
though i don't go in much at present for religious art-but to-day 
i only want a picture carried to the top of the house for me. 
it is rather heavy, so i thought i would ask you to lend me a couple of 
your men." 
"no trouble at all, mr. gray. i am delighted to be of any service to you. 
which is the work of art, sir?" 
"this," replied dorian, moving the screen back. "can you move it, 
covering and all, just as it is? i don't want it to get scratched 
going upstairs." 
"there will be no difficulty, sir," said the genial frame-maker, beginning, 
with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from the long brass 
chains by which it was suspended. "and, now, where shall we carry it to, 
mr. gray?" 
"i will show you the way, mr. hubbard, if you will kindly follow me. 
or perhaps you had better go in front. i am afraid it is right at 
the top of the house. we will go up by the front staircase, as it 
is wider." 
he held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and began 
the ascent. the elaborate character of the frame had made the picture 
extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious protests 
of mr. hubbard, who had the true tradesman's spirited dislike of seeing a 
gentleman doing anything useful, dorian put his hand to it so as to help them. 
"something of a load to carry, sir," gasped the little man when they 
reached the top landing. and he wiped his shiny forehead. 
"i am afraid it is rather heavy," murmured dorian as he unlocked the door 
that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious secret of his 
life and hide his soul from the eyes of men. 
he had not entered the place for more than four years-not, indeed, 
since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, 
and then as a study when he grew somewhat older. it was a large, 
well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last 
lord kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange 
likeness to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always 
hated and desired to keep at a distance. it appeared to dorian 
to have but little changed. there was the huge italian cassone, 
with its fantastically painted panels and its tarnished 
gilt mouldings, in which he had so often hidden himself as a boy. 
there the satinwood book-case filled with his dog-eared schoolbooks. 
on the wall behind it was hanging the same ragged flemish tapestry 
where a faded king and queen were playing chess in a garden, 
while a company of hawkers rode by, carrying hooded birds on their 
gauntleted wrists. how well he remembered it all! every moment 
of his lonely childhood came back to him as he looked round. 
he recalled the stainless purity of his boyish life, and it seemed horrible 
to him that it was here the fatal portrait was to be hidden away. 
how little he had thought, in those dead days, of all that was in store 
for him! 
but there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as this. 
he had the key, and no one else could enter it. beneath its purple pall, 
the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden, and unclean. 
what did it matter? no one could see it. he himself would not see it. 
why should he watch the hideous corruption of his soul? he kept his youth- 
that was enough. and, besides, might not his nature grow finer, after all? 
there was no reason that the future should be so full of shame. 
some love might come across his life, and purify him, and shield him 
from those sins that seemed to be already stirring in spirit and in flesh- 
those curious unpictured sins whose very mystery lent them their subtlety and 
their charm. perhaps, some day, the cruel look would have passed away from 
the scarlet sensitive mouth, and he might show to the world basil hallward's 
masterpiece. 
no; that was impossible. hour by hour, and week by week, the thing 
upon the canvas was growing old. it might escape the hideousness 
of sin, but the hideousness of age was in store for it. 
the cheeks would become hollow or flaccid. yellow crow's feet 
would creep round the fading eyes and make them horrible. 
the hair would lose its brightness, the mouth would gape or droop, 
would be foolish or gross, as the mouths of old men are. 
there would be the wrinkled throat, the cold, blue-veined hands, 
the twisted body, that he remembered in the grandfather who had been 
so stern to him in his boyhood. the picture had to be concealed. 
there was no help for it. 
"bring it in, mr. hubbard, please," he said, wearily, turning round. 
"i am sorry i kept you so long. i was thinking of something else." 
"always glad to have a rest, mr. gray," answered the frame-maker, 
who was still gasping for breath. "where shall we put it, sir?" 
"oh, anywhere. here: this will do. i don't want to have it hung up. 
just lean it against the wall. thanks." 
"might one look at the work of art, sir?" 
dorian started. "it would not interest you, mr. hubbard," 
he said, keeping his eye on the man. he felt ready to leap 
upon him and fling him to the ground if he dared to lift 
the gorgeous hanging that concealed the secret of his life. 
"i shan't trouble you any more now. i am much obliged for your 
kindness in coming round." 
"not at all, not at all, mr. gray. ever ready to do anything for you, sir." 
and mr. hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant, who glanced 
back at dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough uncomely face. 
he had never seen any one so marvellous. 
when the sound of their footsteps had died away, dorian locked 
the door and put the key in his pocket. he felt safe now. 
no one would ever look upon the horrible thing. no eye but his 
would ever see his shame. 
on reaching the library, he found that it was just after 
five o'clock and that the tea had been already brought up. 
on a little table of dark perfumed wood thickly incrusted with nacre, 
a present from lady radley, his guardian's wife, a pretty 
professional invalid who had spent the preceding winter in cairo, 
was lying a note from lord henry, and beside it was a book bound 
in yellow paper, the cover slightly torn and the edges soiled. 
a copy of the third edition of the st. james's gazette had been 
placed on the tea-tray. it was evident that victor had returned. 
he wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they were leaving 
the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing. 
he would be sure to miss the picture-had no doubt missed 
it already, while he had been laying the tea-things. the screen 
had not been set back, and a blank space was visible on the wall. 
perhaps some night he might find him creeping upstairs and trying 
to force the door of the room. it was a horrible thing to have 
a spy in one's house. he had heard of rich men who had been 
blackmailed all their lives by some servant who had read a letter, 
or overheard a conversation, or picked up a card with an address, 
or found beneath a pillow a withered flower or a shred of 
crumpled lace. 
he sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened lord henry's note. 
it was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper, and a book 
that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at eight-fifteen. he 
opened the st. james's languidly, and looked through it. a red pencil-mark on 
the fifth page caught his eye. it drew attention to the following paragraph: 
inquest on an actress.-an inquest was held this morning at the bell tavern, 
hoxton road, by mr. danby, the district coroner, on the body of sibyl vane, 
a young actress recently engaged at the royal theatre, holborn. a verdict 
of death by misadventure was returned. considerable sympathy was expressed 
for the mother of the deceased, who was greatly affected during the giving 
of her own evidence, and that of dr. birrell, who had made the post-mortem 
examination of the deceased. 
he frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across 
the room and flung the pieces away. how ugly it all was! 
and how horribly real ugliness made things! he felt a little 
annoyed with lord henry for having sent him the report. 
and it was certainly stupid of him to have marked it with red pencil. 
victor might have read it. the man knew more than enough english 
for that. 
perhaps he had read it and had begun to suspect something. 
and, yet, what did it matter? what had dorian gray to do 
with sibyl vane's death? there was nothing to fear. 
dorian gray had not killed her. 
his eye fell on the yellow book that lord henry had sent him. 
what was it, he wondered. he went towards the little, 
pearl-coloured octagonal stand that had always looked to him 
like the work of some strange egyptian bees that wrought in silver, 
and taking up the volume, flung himself into an arm-chair and began 
to turn over the leaves. after a few minutes he became absorbed. 
it was the strangest book that he had ever read. it seemed to him 
that in exquisite raiment, and to the delicate sound of flutes, 
the sins of the world were passing in dumb show before him. 
things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly made 
real to him. things of which he had never dreamed were 
gradually revealed. 
it was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being, indeed, 
simply a psychological study of a certain young parisian who spent his life 
trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the passions and modes 
of thought that belonged to every century except his own, and to sum up, 
as it were, in himself the various moods through which the world-spirit had 
ever passed, loving for their mere artificiality those renunciations that men 
have unwisely called virtue, as much as those natural rebellions that wise 
men still call sin. the style in which it was written was that curious 
jewelled style, vivid and obscure at once, full of argot and of archaisms, 
of technical expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes 
the work of some of the finest artists of the french school of symbolistes. 
there were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in colour. 
the life of the senses was described in the terms of mystical philosophy. 
one hardly knew at times whether one was reading the spiritual ecstasies 
of some mediaeval saint or the morbid confessions of a modern sinner. 
it was a poisonous book. the heavy odour of incense seemed to cling about its 
pages and to trouble the brain. the mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle 
monotony of their music, so full as it was of complex refrains and movements 
elaborately repeated, produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from 
chapter to chapter, a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him 
unconscious of the falling day and creeping shadows. 
cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green 
sky gleamed through the windows. he read on by its wan light 
till he could read no more. then, after his valet had reminded 
him several times of the lateness of the hour, he got up, 
and going into the next room, placed the book on the little 
florentine table that always stood at his bedside and began 
to dress for dinner. 
it was almost nine o'clock before he reached the club, where he found 
lord henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored. 
"i am so sorry, harry," he cried, "but really it is entirely your fault. 
that book you sent me so fascinated me that i forgot how the time 
was going." 
"yes, i thought you would like it," replied his host, rising from his chair. 
"i didn't say i liked it, harry. i said it fascinated me. 
there is a great difference." 
"ah, you have discovered that?" murmured lord henry. 
and they passed into the dining-room. 
chapter 11 
for years, dorian gray could not free himself from the influence 
of this book. or perhaps it would be more accurate to say 
that he never sought to free himself from it. he procured from 
paris no less than nine large-paper copies of the first edition, 
and had them bound in different colours, so that they might suit 
his various moods and the changing fancies of a nature over 
which he seemed, at times, to have almost entirely lost control. 
the hero, the wonderful young parisian in whom the romantic 
and the scientific temperaments were so strangely blended, 
became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself. 
and, indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story 
of his own life, written before he had lived it. 
in one point he was more fortunate than the novel's fantastic hero. 
he never knew-never, indeed, had any cause to know-that somewhat 
grotesque dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still 
water which came upon the young parisian so early in his life, 
and was occasioned by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, 
apparently, been so remarkable. it was with an almost cruel joy- 
and perhaps in nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure, 
cruelty has its place-that he used to read the latter part of the book, 
with its really tragic, if somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow 
and despair of one who had himself lost what in others, and the world, 
he had most dearly valued. 
for the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated basil hallward, 
and many others besides him, seemed never to leave him. 
even those who had heard the most evil things against him- 
and from time to time strange rumours about his mode of life 
crept through london and became the chatter of the clubs- 
could not believe anything to his dishonour when they saw him. 
he had always the look of one who had kept himself unspotted 
from the world. men who talked grossly became silent when dorian 
gray entered the room. there was something in the purity of his 
face that rebuked them. his mere presence seemed to recall 
to them the memory of the innocence that they had tarnished. 
they wondered how one so charming and graceful as he was could 
have escaped the stain of an age that was at once sordid 
and sensual. 
often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and 
prolonged absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture 
among those who were his friends, or thought that they were so, 
he himself would creep upstairs to the locked room, open the door 
with the key that never left him now, and stand, with a mirror, 
in front of the portrait that basil hallward had painted of him, 
looking now at the evil and aging face on the canvas, and now at 
the fair young face that laughed back at him from the polished glass. 
the very sharpness of the contrast used to quicken his sense 
of pleasure. he grew more and more enamoured of his own beauty, 
more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul. 
he would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous 
and terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling 
forehead or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes 
which were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age. 
he would place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands 
of the picture, and smile. he mocked the misshapen body and the 
failing limbs. 
there were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless 
in his own delicately scented chamber, or in the sordid 
room of the little ill-famed tavern near the docks which, 
under an assumed name and in disguise, it was his habit 
to frequent, he would think of the ruin he had brought upon 
his soul with a pity that was all the more poignant because it 
was purely selfish. but moments such as these were rare. 
that curiosity about life which lord henry had first stirred 
in him, as they sat together in the garden of their friend, 
seemed to increase with gratification. the more he knew, 
the more he desired to know. he had mad hungers that grew more 
ravenous as he fed them. 
yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to society. 
once or twice every month during the winter, and on each wednesday 
evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the world 
his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the day 
to charm his guests with the wonders of their art. his little dinners, 
in the settling of which lord henry always assisted him, were noted 
as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited, 
as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, 
with its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, 
and embroidered cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver. 
indeed, there were many, especially among the very young men, who saw, 
or fancied that they saw, in dorian gray the true realization 
of a type of which they had often dreamed in eton or oxford days, 
a type that was to combine something of the real culture of the scholar 
with all the grace and distinction and perfect manner of a citizen 
of the world. to them he seemed to be of the company of those whom 
dante describes as having sought to "make themselves perfect 
by the worship of beauty." like gautier, he was one for whom "the 
visible world existed." 
and, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest, 
of the arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but 
a preparation. fashion, by which what is really fantastic 
becomes for a moment universal, and dandyism, which, in its 
own way, is an attempt to assert the absolute modernity 
of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for him. 
his mode of dressing, and the particular styles that from time 
to time he affected, had their marked influence on the young 
exquisites of the mayfair balls and pall mall club windows, 
who copied him in everything that he did, and tried to reproduce 
the accidental charm of his graceful, though to him only 
half-serious, fopperies. 
for, while he was but too ready to accept the position that 
was almost immediately offered to him on his coming of age, 
and found, indeed, a subtle pleasure in the thought that he might 
really become to the london of his own day what to imperial 
neronian rome the author of the satyricon once had been, 
yet in his inmost heart he desired to be something more than a mere 
arbiter elegantiarum, to be consulted on the wearing of a jewel, 
or the knotting of a necktie, or the conduct of a cane. 
he sought to elaborate some new scheme of life that would have 
its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find 
in the spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization. 
the worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, 
been decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about 
passions and sensations that seem stronger than themselves, 
and that they are conscious of sharing with the less highly 
organized forms of existence. but it appeared to dorian gray 
that the true nature of the senses had never been understood, 
and that they had remained savage and animal merely because 
the world had sought to starve them into submission or to kill 
them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements 
of a new spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was 
to be the dominant characteristic. as he looked back upon man 
moving through history, he was haunted by a feeling of loss. 
so much had been surrendered! and to such little purpose! 
there had been mad wilful rejections, monstrous forms 
of self-torture and self-denial, whose origin was fear 
and whose result was a degradation infinitely more terrible 
than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance, 
they had sought to escape; nature, in her wonderful irony, 
driving out the anchorite to feed with the wild animals of 
the desert and giving to the hermit the beasts of the field as 
his companions. 
yes: there was to be, as lord henry had prophesied, a new hedonism 
that was to recreate life and to save it from that harsh uncomely 
puritanism that is having, in our own day, its curious revival. 
it was to have its service of the intellect, certainly, yet it was 
never to accept any theory or system that would involve the sacrifice 
of any mode of passionate experience. its aim, indeed, was to be 
experience itself, and not the fruits of experience, sweet or bitter 
as they might be. of the asceticism that deadens the senses, 
as of the vulgar profligacy that dulls them, it was to know nothing. 
but it was to teach man to concentrate himself upon the moments of a life 
that is itself but a moment. 
there are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, 
either after one of those dreamless nights that make us almost 
enamoured of death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, 
when through the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible 
than reality itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks 
in all grotesques, and that lends to gothic art its enduring vitality, 
this art being, one might fancy, especially the art of those whose 
minds have been troubled with the malady of reverie. gradually white 
fingers creep through the curtains, and they appear to tremble. 
in black fantastic shapes, dumb shadows crawl into the corners 
of the room and crouch there. outside, there is the stirring 
of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men going forth 
to their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down from 
the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though it feared 
to wake the sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep from 
her purple cave. veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, 
and by degrees the forms and colours of things are restored to them, 
and we watch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern. 
the wan mirrors get back their mimic life. the flameless tapers 
stand where we had left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book 
that we had been studying, or the wired flower that we had worn at 
the ball, or the letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we 
had read too often. nothing seems to us changed. out of the unreal 
shadows of the night comes back the real life that we had known. 
we have to resume it where we had left off, and there steals over us 
a terrible sense of the necessity for the continuance of energy 
in the same wearisome round of stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, 
it may be, that our eyelids might open some morning upon a world 
that had been refashioned anew in the darkness for our pleasure, 
a world in which things would have fresh shapes and colours, 
and be changed, or have other secrets, a world in which the past 
would have little or no place, or survive, at any rate, 
in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance 
even of joy having its bitterness and the memories of pleasure 
their pain. 
it was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to dorian 
gray to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; 
and in his search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, 
and possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, 
he would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really 
alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, 
and then, having, as it were, caught their colour and satisfied his 
intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference 
that is not incompatible with a real ardour of temperament, and that, 
indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition 
of it. 
it was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the roman 
catholic communion, and certainly the roman ritual had always 
a great attraction for him. the daily sacrifice, more awful 
really than all the sacrifices of the antique world, stirred him 
as much by its superb rejection of the evidence of the senses 
as by the primitive simplicity of its elements and the eternal 
pathos of the human tragedy that it sought to symbolize. he loved 
to kneel down on the cold marble pavement and watch the priest, 
in his stiff flowered dalmatic, slowly and with white hands moving 
aside the veil of the tabernacle, or raising aloft the jewelled, 
lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid wafer that at times, 
one would fain think, is indeed the "panis caelestis," the bread 
of angels, or, robed in the garments of the passion of christ, 
breaking the host into the chalice and smiting his breast for his sins. 
the fuming censers that the grave boys, in their lace and scarlet, 
tossed into the air like great gilt flowers had their subtle 
fascination for him. as he passed out, he used to look with wonder 
at the black confessionals and long to sit in the dim shadow of one 
of them and listen to men and women whispering through the worn 
grating the true story of their lives. 
but he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual development 
by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of mistaking, for a house 
in which to live, an inn that is but suitable for the sojourn of a night, 
or for a few hours of a night in which there are no stars and the moon is 
in travail. mysticism, with its marvellous power of making common things 
strange to us, and the subtle antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, 
moved him for a season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic 
doctrines of the darwinismus movement in germany, and found a curious pleasure 
in tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the brain, 
or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of the absolute 
dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions, morbid or healthy, 
normal or diseased. yet, as has been said of him before, no theory of life 
seemed to him to be of any importance compared with life itself. he felt 
keenly conscious of how barren all intellectual speculation is when separated 
from action and experiment. he knew that the senses, no less than the soul, 
have their spiritual mysteries to reveal. 
and so he would now study perfumes and the secrets of their manufacture, 
distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous gums from the east. 
he saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not its counterpart 
in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their true relations, 
wondering what there was in frankincense that made one mystical, 
and in ambergris that stirred one's passions, and in violets that woke 
the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the brain, 
and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often to elaborate 
a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several influences 
of sweet-smelling roots and scented, pollen-laden flowers; of aromatic balms 
and of dark and fragrant woods; of spikenard, that sickens; of hovenia, 
that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are said to be able to expel melancholy 
from the soul. 
at another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a long 
latticed room, with a vermilion-and-gold ceiling and walls of olive-green 
lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad gipsies tore wild 
music from little zithers, or grave, yellow-shawled tunisians plucked 
at the strained strings of monstrous lutes, while grinning negroes 
beat monotonously upon copper drums and, crouching upon scarlet mats, 
slim turbaned indians blew through long pipes of reed or brass and charmed- 
or feigned to charm-great hooded snakes and horrible horned adders. 
the harsh intervals and shrill discords of barbaric music stirred 
him at times when schubert's grace, and chopin's beautiful sorrows, 
and the mighty harmonies of beethoven himself, fell unheeded on his ear. 
he collected together from all parts of the world the strangest instruments 
that could be found, either in the tombs of dead nations or among the few 
savage tribes that have survived contact with western civilizations, 
and loved to touch and try them. he had the mysterious juruparis of the rio 
negro indians, that women are not allowed to look at and that even youths 
may not see till they have been subjected to fasting and scourging, 
and the earthen jars of the peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, 
and flutes of human bones such as alfonso de ovalle heard in chile, 
and the sonorous green jaspers that are found near cuzco and give forth 
a note of singular sweetness. he had painted gourds filled with pebbles 
that rattled when they were shaken; the long clarin of the mexicans, 
into which the performer does not blow, but through which he inhales 
the air; the harsh ture of the amazon tribes, that is sounded by 
the sentinels who sit all day long in high trees, and can be heard, 
it is said, at a distance of three leagues; the teponaztli, that has 
two vibrating tongues of wood and is beaten with sticks that are 
smeared with an elastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; 
the yotl-bells of the aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; 
and a huge cylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, 
like the one that bernal diaz saw when he went with cortes into the mexican 
temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a description. 
the fantastic character of these instruments fascinated him, and he felt 
a curious delight in the thought that art, like nature, has her monsters, 
things of bestial shape and with hideous voices. yet, after some time, 
he wearied of them, and would sit in his box at the opera, either alone 
or with lord henry, listening in rapt pleasure to "tannhauser" and seeing 
in the prelude to that great work of art a presentation of the tragedy of 
his own soul. 
on one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared 
at a costume ball as anne de joyeuse, admiral of france, 
in a dress covered with five hundred and sixty pearls. 
this taste enthralled him for years, and, indeed, may be said 
never to have left him. he would often spend a whole day 
settling and resettling in their cases the various stones that he 
had collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that turns red 
by lamplight, the cymophane with its wirelike line of silver, 
the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes, 
carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed stars, 
flame-red cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, 
and amethysts with their alternate layers of ruby and sapphire. 
he loved the red gold of the sunstone, and the moonstone's 
pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow of the milky opal. 
he procured from amsterdam three emeralds of extraordinary size and 
richness of colour, and had a turquoise de la vieille roche that was 
the envy of all the connoisseurs. 
he discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels. 
in alphonso's clericalis disciplina a serpent was mentioned with 
eyes of real jacinth, and in the romantic history of alexander, 
the conqueror of emathia was said to have found in the vale of jordan 
snakes "with collars of real emeralds growing on their backs." 
there was a gem in the brain of the dragon, philostratus told us, 
and "by the exhibition of golden letters and a scarlet robe" 
the monster could be thrown into a magical sleep and slain. 
according to the great alchemist, pierre de boniface, the diamond 
rendered a man invisible, and the agate of india made him eloquent. 
the cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth provoked sleep, 
and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine. the garnet cast 
out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her colour. 
the selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus, 
that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids. 
leonardus camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a newly 
killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison. the bezoar, 
that was found in the heart of the arabian deer, was a charm that could 
cure the plague. in the nests of arabian birds was the aspilates, 
that, according to democritus, kept the wearer from any danger 
by fire. 
the king of ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand, 
as the ceremony of his coronation. the gates of the palace of john 
the priest were "made of sardius, with the horn of the horned 
snake inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within." 
over the gable were "two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles," 
so that the gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night. 
in lodge's strange romance 'a margarite of america', it was stated 
that in the chamber of the queen one could behold "all the chaste 
ladies of the world, inchased out of silver, looking through fair 
mirrours of chrysolites, carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults." 
marco polo had seen the inhabitants of zipangu place rose-coloured 
pearls in the mouths of the dead. a sea-monster had been 
enamoured of the pearl that the diver brought to king perozes, 
and had slain the thief, and mourned for seven moons over its loss. 
when the huns lured the king into the great pit, he flung it away- 
procopius tells the story-nor was it ever found again, 
though the emperor anastasius offered five hundred-weight of gold 
pieces for it. the king of malabar had shown to a certain venetian 
a rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god that 
he worshipped. 
when the duke de valentinois, son of alexander vi, visited louis xii 
of france, his horse was loaded with gold leaves, according to brantome, 
and his cap had double rows of rubies that threw out a great light. 
charles of england had ridden in stirrups hung with four hundred and 
twenty-one diamonds. richard ii had a coat, valued at thirty thousand marks, 
which was covered with balas rubies. hall described henry viii, 
on his way to the tower previous to his coronation, as wearing "a 
jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds and other 
rich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large balasses." 
the favourites of james i wore ear-rings of emeralds set in gold filigrane. 
edward ii gave to piers gaveston a suit of red-gold armour studded 
with jacinths, a collar of gold roses set with turquoise-stones, and a 
skull-cap parseme with pearls. henry ii wore jewelled gloves reaching 
to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with twelve rubies and fifty-two 
great orients. the ducal hat of charles the rash, the last duke 
of burgundy of his race, was hung with pear-shaped pearls and studded 
with sapphires. 
how exquisite life had once been! how gorgeous in its pomp and decoration! 
even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful. 
then he turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries 
that performed the office of frescoes in the chill rooms of 
the northern nations of europe. as he investigated the subject- 
and he always had an extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely 
absorbed for the moment in whatever he took up-he was almost 
saddened by the reflection of the ruin that time brought on 
beautiful and wonderful things. he, at any rate, had escaped that. 
summer followed summer, and the yellow jonquils bloomed and died 
many times, and nights of horror repeated the story of their shame, 
but he was unchanged. no winter marred his face or stained his 
flowerlike bloom. how different it was with material things! 
where had they passed to? where was the great crocus-coloured robe, 
on which the gods fought against the giants, that had been worked 
by brown girls for the pleasure of athena? where the huge 
velarium that nero had stretched across the colosseum at rome, 
that titan sail of purple on which was represented the starry sky, 
and apollo driving a chariot drawn by white, gilt-reined steeds? 
he longed to see the curious table-napkins wrought for the priest 
of the sun, on which were displayed all the dainties and viands that 
could be wanted for a feast; the mortuary cloth of king chilperic, 
with its three hundred golden bees; the fantastic robes that excited 
the indignation of the bishop of pontus and were figured with 
"lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests, rocks, hunters-all, in fact, 
that a painter can copy from nature"; and the coat that charles 
of orleans once wore, on the sleeves of which were embroidered 
the verses of a song beginning "madame, je suis tout joyeux," 
the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold thread, 
and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four pearls. 
he read of the room that was prepared at the palace at rheims for 
the use of queen joan of burgundy and was decorated with "thirteen 
hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned 
with the king's arms, and five hundred and sixty-one butterflies, 
whose wings were similarly ornamented with the arms of the queen, 
the whole worked in gold." catherine de medicis had a mourning-bed 
made for her of black velvet powdered with crescents and suns. 
its curtains were of damask, with leafy wreaths and garlands, 
figured upon a gold and silver ground, and fringed along the edges 
with broideries of pearls, and it stood in a room hung with rows 
of the queen's devices in cut black velvet upon cloth of silver. 
louis xiv had gold embroidered caryatides fifteen feet high 
in his apartment. the state bed of sobieski, king of poland, 
was made of smyrna gold brocade embroidered in turquoises with verses 
from the koran. its supports were of silver gilt, beautifully chased, 
and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled medallions. 
it had been taken from the turkish camp before vienna, and the 
standard of mohammed had stood beneath the tremulous gilt of its 
canopy. 
and so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite 
specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, 
getting the dainty delhi muslins, finely wrought with gold-thread palmates 
and stitched over with iridescent beetles' wings; the dacca gauzes, 
that from their transparency are known in the east as "woven air," 
and "running water," and "evening dew"; strange figured cloths from java; 
elaborate yellow chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair blue 
silks and wrought with fleurs-de-lis, birds and images; veils of lacis 
worked in hungary point; sicilian brocades and stiff spanish velvets; 
georgian work, with its gilt coins, and japanese foukousas, with their 
green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds. 
he had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, 
as indeed he had for everything connected with the service 
of the church. in the long cedar chests that lined the west 
gallery of his house, he had stored away many rare and beautiful 
specimens of what is really the raiment of the bride of christ, 
who must wear purple and jewels and fine linen that she may 
hide the pallid macerated body that is worn by the suffering 
that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain. 
he possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask, 
figured with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set 
in six-petalled formal blossoms, beyond which on either side 
was the pine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls. the orphreys 
were divided into panels representing scenes from the life 
of the virgin, and the coronation of the virgin was figured 
in coloured silks upon the hood. this was italian work 
of the fifteenth century. another cope was of green velvet, 
embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves, from 
which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which 
were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals. 
the morse bore a seraph's head in gold-thread raised work. 
the orphreys were woven in a diaper of red and gold silk, 
and were starred with medallions of many saints and martyrs, 
among whom was st. sebastian. he had chasubles, also, 
of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and gold brocade, 
and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold, figured with 
representations of the passion and crucifixion of christ, 
and embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems; 
dalmatics of white satin and pink silk damask, decorated with 
tulips and dolphins and fleurs-de-lis; altar frontals 
of crimson velvet and blue linen; and many corporals, 
chalice-veils, and sudaria. in the mystic offices to which 
such things were put, there was something that quickened 
his imagination. 
for these treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely house, 
were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he could escape, 
for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times to be almost too 
great to be borne. upon the walls of the lonely locked room where he had 
spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with his own hands the terrible 
portrait whose changing features showed him the real degradation of his life, 
and in front of it had draped the purple-and-gold pall as a curtain. 
for weeks he would not go there, would forget the hideous painted thing, 
and get back his light heart, his wonderful joyousness, his passionate 
absorption in mere existence. then, suddenly, some night he would creep 
out of the house, go down to dreadful places near blue gate fields, 
and stay there, day after day, until he was driven away. on his return 
he would sit in front of the her times, with that pride of individualism 
that is half the fascination of sin, and smiling with secret pleasure 
at the misshapen shadow that had to bear the burden that should have been 
his own. 
after a few years he could not endure to be long out of england, 
and gave up the villa that he had shared at trouville with lord henry, 
as well as the little white walled-in house at algiers where they 
had more than once spent the winter. he hated to be separated from 
the picture that was such a part of his life, and was also afraid 
that during his absence some one might gain access to the room, 
in spite of the elaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon 
the door. 
he was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing. 
it was true that the portrait still preserved, under all 
the foulness and ugliness of the face, its marked likeness 
to himself; but what could they learn from that? he would laugh 
at any one who tried to taunt him. he had not painted it. 
what was it to him how vile and full of shame it looked? 
even if he told them, would they believe it? 
yet he was afraid. sometimes when he was down at his great house 
in nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his 
own rank who were his chief companions, and astounding the county 
by the wanton luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, 
he would suddenly leave his guests and rush back to town to see 
that the door had not been tampered with and that the picture was 
still there. what if it should be stolen? the mere thought made 
him cold with horror. surely the world would know his secret then. 
perhaps the world already suspected it. 
for, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who distrusted him. 
he was very nearly blackballed at a west end club of which his birth 
and social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it 
was said that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into 
the smoking-room of the churchill, the duke of berwick and another 
gentleman got up in a marked manner and went out. curious stories 
became current about him after he had passed his twenty-fifth year. 
it was rumoured that he had been seen brawling with foreign sailors 
in a low den in the distant parts of whitechapel, and that he consorted 
with thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their trade. 
his extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappear 
again in society, men would whisper to each other in corners, or pass him 
with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though they 
were determined to discover his secret. 
of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, 
took no notice, and in the opinion of most people his frank 
debonair manner, his charming boyish smile, and the infinite 
grace of that wonderful youth that seemed never to leave him, 
were in themselves a sufficient answer to the calumnies, 
for so they termed them, that were circulated about him. 
it was remarked, however, that some of those who had been 
most intimate with him appeared, after a time, to shun him. 
women who had wildly adored him, and for his sake had braved 
all social censure and set convention at defiance, were seen 
to grow pallid with shame or horror if dorian gray entered 
the room. 
yet these whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many 
his strange and dangerous charm. his great wealth was a certain 
element of security. society-civilized society, at least- 
is never very ready to believe anything to the detriment of those 
who are both rich and fascinating. it feels instinctively that 
manners are of more importance than morals, and, in its opinion, 
the highest respectability is of much less value than the possession 
of a good chef. and, after all, it is a very poor consolation 
to be told that the man who has given one a bad dinner, 
or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private life. 
even the cardinal virtues cannot atone for half-cold entrees, 
as lord henry remarked once, in a discussion on the subject, 
and there is possibly a good deal to be said for his view. 
for the canons of good society are, or should be, the same 
as the canons of art. form is absolutely essential to it. 
it should have the dignity of a ceremony, as well as 
its unreality, and should combine the insincere character 
of a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such plays 
delightful to us. is insincerity such a terrible thing? 
i think not. it is merely a method by which we can multiply 
our personalities. 
such, at any rate, was dorian gray's opinion. he used to wonder 
at the shallow psychology of those who conceive the ego in man 
as a thing simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence. 
to him, man was a being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, 
a complex multiform creature that bore within itself strange 
legacies of thought and passion, and whose very flesh was tainted 
with the monstrous maladies of the dead. he loved to stroll 
through the gaunt cold picture-gallery of his country house and look 
at the various portraits of those whose blood flowed in his veins. 
here was philip herbert, described by francis osborne, 
in his memoires on the reigns of queen elizabeth and king james, 
as one who was "caressed by the court for his handsome face, 
which kept him not long company." was it young herbert's 
life that he sometimes led? had some strange poisonous 
germ crept from body to body till it had reached his own? 
was it some dim sense of that ruined grace that had made 
him so suddenly, and almost without cause, give utterance, 
in basil hallward's studio, to the mad prayer that had so changed 
his life? here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled surcoat, 
and gilt-edged ruff and wristbands, stood sir anthony sherard, 
with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet. 
what had this man's legacy been? had the lover of giovanna 
of naples bequeathed him some inheritance of sin and shame? 
were his own actions merely the dreams that the dead man 
had not dared to realize? here, from the fading canvas, 
smiled lady elizabeth devereux, in her gauze hood, pearl stomacher, 
and pink slashed sleeves. a flower was in her right hand, 
and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white and damask roses. 
on a table by her side lay a mandolin and an apple. 
there were large green rosettes upon her little pointed shoes. 
he knew her life, and the strange stories that were told about 
her lovers. had he something of her temperament in him? these oval, 
heavy-lidded eyes seemed to look curiously at him. what of 
george willoughby, with his powdered hair and fantastic patches? 
how evil he looked! the face was saturnine and swarthy, 
and the sensual lips seemed to be twisted with disdain. 
delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands that 
were so overladen with rings. he had been a macaroni of the 
eighteenth century, and the friend, in his youth, of lord ferrars. 
what of the second lord beckenham, the companion of the prince 
regent in his wildest days, and one of the witnesses at 
the secret marriage with mrs. fitzherbert? how proud and 
handsome he was, with his chestnut curls and insolent pose! 
what passions had he bequeathed? the world had looked upon 
him as infamous. he had led the orgies at carlton house. 
the star of the garter glittered upon his breast. beside him hung 
the portrait of his wife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black. 
her blood, also, stirred within him. how curious it all seemed! 
and his mother with her lady hamilton face and her moist, 
wine-dashed lips-he knew what he had got from her. 
he had got from her his beauty, and his passion for the beauty 
of others. she laughed at him in her loose bacchante dress. 
there were vine leaves in her hair. the purple spilled 
from the cup she was holding. the carnations of the painting 
had withered, but the eyes were still wonderful in their depth 
and brilliancy of colour. they seemed to follow him wherever he 
went. 
yet one had ancestors in literature as well as in one's own race, 
nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly 
with an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious. 
there were times when it appeared to dorian gray that the whole 
of history was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived 
it in act and circumstance, but as his imagination had created 
it for him, as it had been in his brain and in his passions. 
he felt that he had known them all, those strange terrible figures 
that had passed across the stage of the world and made sin so marvellous 
and evil so full of subtlety. it seemed to him that in some mysterious 
way their lives had been his own. 
the hero of the wonderful novel that had so influenced his life had 
himself known this curious fancy. in the seventh chapter he tells how, 
crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, 
as tiberius, in a garden at capri, reading the shameful books 
of elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and 
the flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as caligula, 
had caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped 
in an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as domitian, 
had wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, 
looking round with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger 
that was to end his days, and sick with that ennui, that terrible 
taedium vitae, that comes on those to whom life denies nothing; 
and had peered through a clear emerald at the red shambles of the circus 
and then, in a litter of pearl and purple drawn by silver-shod mules, 
been carried through the street of pomegranates to a house of gold 
and heard men cry on nero caesar as he passed by; and, as elagabalus, 
had painted his face with colours, and plied the distaff among the women, 
and brought the moon from carthage and given her in mystic marriage 
to the sun. 
over and over again dorian used to read this fantastic chapter, 
and the two chapters immediately following, in which, as in some 
curious tapestries or cunningly wrought enamels, were pictured 
the awful and beautiful forms of those whom vice and blood 
and weariness had made monstrous or mad: filippo, duke of milan, 
who slew his wife and painted her lips with a scarlet poison 
that her lover might suck death from the dead thing he fondled; 
pietro barbi, the venetian, known as paul the second, 
who sought in his vanity to assume the title of formosus, 
and whose tiara, valued at two hundred thousand florins, 
was bought at the price of a terrible sin; gian maria visconti, 
who used hounds to chase living men and whose murdered 
body was covered with roses by a harlot who had loved him; 
the borgia on his white horse, with fratricide riding beside 
him and his mantle stained with the blood of perotto; 
pietro riario, the young cardinal archbishop of florence, 
child and minion of sixtus iv, whose beauty was equalled only by 
his debauchery, and who received leonora of aragon in a pavilion 
of white and crimson silk, filled with nymphs and centaurs, 
and gilded a boy that he might serve at the feast as ganymede 
or hylas; ezzelin, whose melancholy could be cured only by 
the spectacle of death, and who had a passion for red blood, 
as other men have for red wine-the son of the fiend, 
as was reported, and one who had cheated his father at dice 
when gambling with him for his own soul; giambattista cibo, 
who in mockery took the name of innocent and into whose torpid 
veins the blood of three lads was infused by a jewish doctor; 
sigismondo malatesta, the lover of isotta and the lord of rimini, 
whose effigy was burned at rome as the enemy of god and man, 
who strangled polyssena with a napkin, and gave poison 
to ginevra d'este in a cup of emerald, and in honour of a 
shameful passion built a pagan church for christian worship; 
charles vi, who had so wildly adored his brother's wife that a 
leper had warned him of the insanity that was coming on him, 
and who, when his brain had sickened and grown strange, 
could only be soothed by saracen cards painted with the images 
of love and death and madness; and, in his trimmed jerkin 
and jewelled cap and acanthuslike curls, grifonetto baglioni, 
who slew astorre with his bride, and simonetto with his page, 
and whose comeliness was such that, as he lay dying 
in the yellow piazza of perugia, those who had hated him 
could not choose but weep, and atalanta, who had cursed him, 
blessed him. 
there was a horrible fascination in them all. he saw them 
at night, and they troubled his imagination in the day. 
the renaissance knew of strange manners of poisoning- 
poisoning by a helmet and a lighted torch, by an embroidered glove 
and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander and by an amber chain. 
dorian gray had been poisoned by a book. there were moments when 
he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he could realize 
his conception of the beautiful. 
chapter 12 
it was on the ninth of november, the eve of his own thirty-eighth birthday, 
as he often remembered afterwards. 
he was walking home about eleven o'clock from lord henry's, where he had 
been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold and foggy. 
at the corner of grosvenor square and south audley street, a man passed him in 
the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of his grey ulster turned up. 
he had a bag in his hand. dorian recognized him. it was basil hallward. 
a strange sense of fear, for which he could not account, came over him. 
he made no sign of recognition and went on quickly in the direction of his 
own house. 
but hallward had seen him. dorian heard him first stopping 
on the pavement and then hurrying after him. in a few moments, 
his hand was on his arm. 
"dorian! what an extraordinary piece of luck! i have been 
waiting for you in your library ever since nine o'clock. finally 
i took pity on your tired servant and told him to go to bed, 
as he let me out. i am off to paris by the midnight train, 
and i particularly wanted to see you before i left. 
i thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as you passed me. 
but i wasn't quite sure. didn't you recognize me?" 
"in this fog, my dear basil? why, i can't even recognize grosvenor square. 
i believe my house is somewhere about here, but i don't feel at all certain 
about it. i am sorry you are going away, as i have not seen you for ages. 
but i suppose you will be back soon?" 
"no: i am going to be out of england for six months. 
i intend to take a studio in paris and shut myself up till i have 
finished a great picture i have in my head. however, it wasn't 
about myself i wanted to talk. here we are at your door. 
let me come in for a moment. i have something to say 
to you." 
"i shall be charmed. but won't you miss your train?" said dorian gray 
languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his latch-key. 
the lamplight struggled out through the fog, and hallward looked 
at his watch. "i have heaps of time," he answered. "the train 
doesn't go till twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven. 
in fact, i was on my way to the club to look for you, when i met you. 
you see, i shan't have any delay about luggage, as i have sent on my 
heavy things. all i have with me is in this bag, and i can easily 
get to victoria in twenty minutes." 
dorian looked at him and smiled. "what a way for a fashionable 
painter to travel! a gladstone bag and an ulster! come in, 
or the fog will get into the house. and mind you don't 
talk about anything serious. nothing is serious nowadays. 
at least nothing should be." 
hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed dorian into the library. 
there was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open hearth. the lamps 
were lit, and an open dutch silver spirit-case stood, with some siphons of 
soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on a little marqueterie table. 
"you see your servant made me quite at home, dorian. he gave me 
everything i wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes. 
he is a most hospitable creature. i like him much better than 
the frenchman you used to have. what has become of the frenchman, 
by the bye?" 
dorian shrugged his shoulders. "i believe he married lady radley's maid, 
and has established her in paris as an english dressmaker. anglomania is 
very fashionable over there now, i hear. it seems silly of the french, 
doesn't it? but-do you know?-he was not at all a bad servant. 
i never liked him, but i had nothing to complain about. one often 
imagines things that are quite absurd. he was really very devoted to me 
and seemed quite sorry when he went away. have another brandy-and-soda? or 
would you like hock-and-seltzer? i always take hock-and-seltzer myself. 
there is sure to be some in the next room." 
"thanks, i won't have anything more," said the painter, 
taking his cap and coat off and throwing them on the bag 
that he had placed in the corner. "and now, my dear fellow, 
i want to speak to you seriously. don't frown like that. 
you make it so much more difficult for me." 
"what is it all about?" cried dorian in his petulant way, 
flinging himself down on the sofa. "i hope it is not about myself. 
i am tired of myself to-night. i should like to be somebody else." 
"it is about yourself," answered hallward in his grave deep voice, 
"and i must say it to you. i shall only keep you half an hour." 
dorian sighed and lit a cigarette. "half an hour!" he murmured. 
"it is not much to ask of you, dorian, and it is entirely for your own sake 
that i am speaking. i think it right that you should know that the most 
dreadful things are being said against you in london." 
"i don't wish to know anything about them. i love scandals 
about other people, but scandals about myself don't interest me. 
they have not got the charm of novelty." 
"they must interest you, dorian. every gentleman is interested 
in his good name. you don't want people to talk of you as 
something vile and degraded. of course, you have your position, 
and your wealth, and all that kind of thing. but position 
and wealth are not everything. mind you, i don't believe these 
rumours at all. at least, i can't believe them when i see you. 
sin is a thing that writes itself across a man's face. 
it cannot be concealed. people talk sometimes of secret vices. 
there are no such things. if a wretched man has a vice, it shows 
itself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids, 
the moulding of his hands even. somebody-i won't mention his name, 
but you know him-came to me last year to have his portrait done. 
i had never seen him before, and had never heard anything 
about him at the time, though i have heard a good deal since. 
he offered an extravagant price. i refused him. 
there was something in the shape of his fingers that i hated. 
i know now that i was quite right in what i fancied about him. 
his life is dreadful. but you, dorian, with your pure, 
bright, innocent face, and your marvellous untroubled youth- 
i can't believe anything against you. and yet i see you 
very seldom, and you never come down to the studio now, 
and when i am away from you, and i hear all these hideous things 
that people are whispering about you, i don't know what to say. 
why is it, dorian, that a man like the duke of berwick leaves 
the room of a club when you enter it? why is it that so many 
gentlemen in london will neither go to your house or invite 
you to theirs? you used to be a friend of lord staveley. 
i met him at dinner last week. your name happened to come up 
in conversation, in connection with the miniatures you have lent 
to the exhibition at the dudley. staveley curled his lip and said 
that you might have the most artistic tastes, but that you 
were a man whom no pure-minded girl should be allowed to know, 
and whom no chaste woman should sit in the same room with. 
i reminded him that i was a friend of yours, and asked him what 
he meant. he told me. he told me right out before everybody. 
it was horrible! why is your friendship so fatal to young men? 
there was that wretched boy in the guards who committed suicide. 
you were his great friend. there was sir henry ashton, 
who had to leave england with a tarnished name. you and 
he were inseparable. what about adrian singleton and his 
dreadful end? what about lord kent's only son and his career? 
i met his father yesterday in st. james's street. he seemed broken 
with shame and sorrow. what about the young duke of perth? 
what sort of life has he got now? what gentleman would associate with 
him?" 
"stop, basil. you are talking about things of which you know nothing," 
said dorian gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt 
in his voice. "you ask me why berwick leaves a room when i enter it. 
it is because i know everything about his life, not because he knows 
anything about mine. with such blood as he has in his veins, how could 
his record be clean? you ask me about henry ashton and young perth. 
did i teach the one his vices, and the other his debauchery? 
if kent's silly son takes his wife from the streets, what is that to me? 
if adrian singleton writes his friend's name across a bill, am i his keeper? 
i know how people chatter in england. the middle classes air their moral 
prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper about what they 
call the profligacies of their betters in order to try and pretend 
that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with the people 
they slander. in this country, it is enough for a man to have 
distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him. 
and what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, 
lead themselves? my dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land 
of the hypocrite." 
"dorian," cried hallward, "that is not the question. 
england is bad enough i know, and english society is all wrong. 
that is the reason why i want you to be fine. you have not 
been fine. one has a right to judge of a man by the effect 
he has over his friends. yours seem to lose all sense of honour, 
of goodness, of purity. you have filled them with a madness 
for pleasure. they have gone down into the depths. 
you led them there. yes: you led them there, and yet you 
can smile, as you are smiling now. and there is worse behind. 
i know you and harry are inseparable. surely for that reason, 
if for none other, you should not have made his sister's name 
a by-word." 
"take care, basil. you go too far." 
"i must speak, and you must listen. you shall listen. 
when you met lady gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever 
touched her. is there a single decent woman in london now 
who would drive with her in the park? why, even her children 
are not allowed to live with her. then there are other stories- 
stories that you have been seen creeping at dawn out of dreadful 
houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest dens in london. 
are they true? can they be true? when i first heard them, 
i laughed. i hear them now, and they make me shudder. 
what about your country-house and the life that is 
led there? dorian, you don't know what is said about you. 
i won't tell you that i don't want to preach to you. 
i remember harry saying once that every man who turned himself 
into an amateur curate for the moment always began by saying that, 
and then proceeded to break his word. i do want to preach to you. 
i want you to lead such a life as will make the world respect you. 
i want you to have a clean name and a fair record. 
i want you to get rid of the dreadful people you associate with. 
don't shrug your shoulders like that. don't be so indifferent. 
you have a wonderful influence. let it be for good, not for evil. 
they say that you corrupt every one with whom you become intimate, 
and that it is quite sufficient for you to enter a house 
for shame of some kind to follow after. i don't know whether 
it is so or not. how should i know? but it is said of you. 
i am told things that it seems impossible to doubt. 
lord gloucester was one of my greatest friends at oxford. 
he showed me a letter that his wife had written to him when she 
was dying alone in her villa at mentone. your name was implicated 
in the most terrible confession i ever read. i told him that it 
was absurd-that i knew you thoroughly and that you were incapable 
of anything of the kind. know you? i wonder do i know you? 
before i could answer that, i should have to see your 
soul." 
"to see my soul!" muttered dorian gray, starting up from the sofa 
and turning almost white from fear. 
"yes," answered hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in his voice, 
"to see your soul. but only god can do that." 
a bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of the younger man. 
"you shall see it yourself, to-night!" he cried, seizing a 
lamp from the table. "come: it is your own handiwork. 
why shouldn't you look at it? you can tell the world all about 
it afterwards, if you choose. nobody would believe you. 
if they did believe you, they would like me all the better for it. 
i know the age better than you do, though you will prate 
about it so tediously. come, i tell you. you have chattered 
enough about corruption. now you shall look on it face 
to face." 
there was the madness of pride in every word he uttered. 
he stamped his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner. 
he felt a terrible joy at the thought that some one else 
was to share his secret, and that the man who had painted 
the portrait that was the origin of all his shame was to be 
burdened for the rest of his life with the hideous memory of what 
he had done. 
"yes," he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly 
into his stern eyes, "i shall show you my soul. you shall see 
the thing that you fancy only god can see." 
hallward started back. "this is blasphemy, dorian!" he cried. 
"you must not say things like that. they are horrible, and they 
don't mean anything." 
"you think so?" he laughed again. 
"i know so. as for what i said to you to-night, i said it for your good. 
you know i have been always a stanch friend to you." 
"don't touch me. finish what you have to say." 
a twisted flash of pain shot across the painter's face. 
he paused for a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him. 
after all, what right had he to pry into the life of dorian gray? 
if he had done a tithe of what was rumoured about him, 
how much he must have suffered! then he straightened himself up, 
and walked over to the fire-place, and stood there, looking at 
the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and their throbbing cores 
of flame. 
"i am waiting, basil," said the young man in a hard clear voice. 
he turned round. "what i have to say is this," he cried. "you must give 
me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against you. 
if you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to end, 
i shall believe you. deny them, dorian, deny them! can't you see what i 
am going through? my god! don't tell me that you are bad, and corrupt, 
and shameful." 
dorian gray smiled. there was a curl of contempt in his lips. 
"come upstairs, basil," he said quietly. "i keep a diary of my life 
from day to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written. 
i shall show it to you if you come with me." 
"i shall come with you, dorian, if you wish it. i see i have missed 
my train. that makes no matter. i can go to-morrow. but don't ask me 
to read anything to-night. all i want is a plain answer to my question." 
"that shall be given to you upstairs. i could not give it here. 
you will not have to read long." 
chapter 13 
he passed out of the room and began the ascent, basil hallward following 
close behind. they walked softly, as men do instinctively at night. 
the lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase. a rising wind 
made some of the windows rattle. 
when they reached the top landing, dorian set the lamp down 
on the floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock. 
"you insist on knowing, basil?" he asked in a low voice. 
"yes." 
"i am delighted," he answered, smiling. then he added, 
somewhat harshly, "you are the one man in the world who is 
entitled to know everything about me. you have had more 
to do with my life than you think"; and, taking up the lamp, 
he opened the door and went in. a cold current of air passed them, 
and the light shot up for a moment in a flame of murky orange. 
he shuddered. "shut the door behind you," he whispered, 
as he placed the lamp on the table. 
hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression. 
the room looked as if it had not been lived in for years. 
a faded flemish tapestry, a curtained picture, an old 
italian cassone, and an almost empty book-case-that was all 
that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and a table. 
as dorian gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was 
standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place 
was covered with dust and that the carpet was in holes. 
a mouse ran scuffling behind the wainscoting. there was a damp odour 
of mildew. 
"so you think that it is only god who sees the soul, basil? 
draw that curtain back, and you will see mine." 
the voice that spoke was cold and cruel. "you are mad, dorian, or playing 
a part," muttered hallward, frowning. 
"you won't? then i must do it myself," said the young man, 
and he tore the curtain from its rod and flung it on the ground. 
an exclamation of horror broke from the painter's lips as he saw 
in the dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him. 
there was something in its expression that filled him with disgust 
and loathing. good heavens! it was dorian gray's own face 
that he was looking at! the horror, whatever it was, had not yet 
entirely spoiled that marvellous beauty. there was still some 
gold in the thinning hair and some scarlet on the sensual mouth. 
the sodden eyes had kept something of the loveliness of their blue, 
the noble curves had not yet completely passed away from chiselled 
nostrils and from plastic throat. yes, it was dorian himself. 
but who had done it? he seemed to recognize his own brushwork, 
and the frame was his own design. the idea was monstrous, yet he 
felt afraid. he seized the lighted candle, and held it to the picture. 
in the left-hand corner was his own name, traced in long letters of 
bright vermilion. 
it was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire. 
he had never done that. still, it was his own picture. 
he knew it, and he felt as if his blood had changed 
in a moment from fire to sluggish ice. his own picture! 
what did it mean? why had it altered? he turned and looked 
at dorian gray with the eyes of a sick man. his mouth twitched, 
and his parched tongue seemed unable to articulate. 
he passed his hand across his forehead. it was dank with 
clammy sweat. 
the young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him 
with that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those 
who are absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting. 
there was neither real sorrow in it nor real joy. there was 
simply the passion of the spectator, with perhaps a flicker 
of triumph in his eyes. he had taken the flower out of his coat, 
and was smelling it, or pretending to do so. 
"what does this mean?" cried hallward, at last. his own voice sounded 
shrill and curious in his ears. 
"years ago, when i was a boy," said dorian gray, crushing the flower 
in his hand, "you met me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain 
of my good looks. one day you introduced me to a friend of yours, 
who explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished 
a portrait of me that revealed to me the wonder of beauty. 
in a mad moment that, even now, i don't know whether i regret 
or not, i made a wish, perhaps you would call it a prayer. 
"i remember it! oh, how well i remember it! no! the thing is impossible. 
the room is damp. mildew has got into the canvas. the paints i used had some 
wretched mineral poison in them. i tell you the thing is impossible." 
"ah, what is impossible?" murmured the young man, going over to the window 
and leaning his forehead against the cold, mist-stained glass. 
"you told me you had destroyed it." 
"i was wrong. it has destroyed me." 
"i don't believe it is my picture." 
"can't you see your ideal in it?" said dorian bitterly. 
"my ideal, as you call it. . ." 
"as you called it." 
"there was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful. you were to me such 
an ideal as i shall never meet again. this is the face of a satyr." 
"it is the face of my soul." 
"christ! what a thing i must have worshipped! it has the eyes of a devil." 
"each of us has heaven and hell in him, basil," cried dorian 
with a wild gesture of despair. 
hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it. 
"my god! if it is true," he exclaimed, "and this is 
what you have done with your life, why, you must be worse 
even than those who talk against you fancy you to be!" 
he held the light up again to the canvas and examined it. 
the surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he had left it. 
it was from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror 
had come. through some strange quickening of inner life 
the leprosies of sin were slowly eating the thing away. 
the rotting of a corpse in a watery grave was not 
so fearful. 
his hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor 
and lay there sputtering. he placed his foot on it and put it out. 
then he flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by 
the table and buried his face in his hands. 
"good god, dorian, what a lesson! what an awful lesson!" 
there was no answer, but he could hear the young man 
sobbing at the window. "pray, dorian, pray," he murmured. 
"what is it that one was taught to say in one's boyhood? 
'lead us not into temptation. forgive us our sins. 
wash away our iniquities.' let us say that together. 
the prayer of your pride has been answered. the prayer of your 
repentance will be answered also. i worshipped you too much. 
i am punished for it. you worshipped yourself too much. we are 
both punished." 
dorian gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed eyes. 
"it is too late, basil," he faltered. 
"it is never too late, dorian. let us kneel down and try if we 
cannot remember a prayer. isn't there a verse somewhere, 
'though your sins be as scarlet, yet i will make them as white 
as snow'?" 
"those words mean nothing to me now." 
"hush! don't say that. you have done enough evil in your life. 
my god! don't you see that accursed thing leering at us?" 
dorian gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an uncontrollable 
feeling of hatred for basil hallward came over him, as though 
it had been suggested to him by the image on the canvas, 
whispered into his ear by those grinning lips. the mad 
passions of a hunted animal stirred within him, and he loathed 
the man who was seated at the table, more than in his whole 
life he had ever loathed anything. he glanced wildly around. 
something glimmered on the top of the painted chest that 
faced him. his eye fell on it. he knew what it was. 
it was a knife that he had brought up, some days before, 
to cut a piece of cord, and had forgotten to take away with him. 
he moved slowly towards it, passing hallward as he did so. 
as soon as he got behind him, he seized it and turned round. 
hallward stirred in his chair as if he was going to rise. 
he rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that is behind 
the ear, crushing the man's head down on the table and stabbing again 
and again. 
there was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one choking 
with blood. three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively, 
waving grotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air. he stabbed him twice more, 
but the man did not move. something began to trickle on the floor. 
he waited for a moment, still pressing the head down. then he threw 
the knife on the table, and listened. 
he could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet. 
he opened the door and went out on the landing. the house was 
absolutely quiet. no one was about. for a few seconds he stood 
bending over the balustrade and peering down into the black seething 
well of darkness. then he took out the key and returned to the room, 
locking himself in as he did so. 
the thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table 
with bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms. 
had it not been for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted 
black pool that was slowly widening on the table, one would have said 
that the man was simply asleep. 
how quickly it had all been done! he felt strangely calm, and walking 
over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony. 
the wind had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous 
peacock's tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes. he looked 
down and saw the policeman going his rounds and flashing the long 
beam of his lantern on the doors of the silent houses. the crimson 
spot of a prowling hansom gleamed at the corner and then vanished. 
a woman in a fluttering shawl was creeping slowly by the railings, 
staggering as she went. now and then she stopped and peered back. 
once, she began to sing in a hoarse voice. the policeman strolled 
over and said something to her. she stumbled away, laughing. 
a bitter blast swept across the square. the gas-lamps flickered 
and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their black iron 
branches to and fro. he shivered and went back, closing the window 
behind him. 
having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it. 
he did not even glance at the murdered man. he felt that 
the secret of the whole thing was not to realize the situation. 
the friend who had painted the fatal portrait to which 
all his misery had been due had gone out of his life. 
that was enough. 
then he remembered the lamp. it was a rather curious one of 
moorish workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques 
of burnished steel, and studded with coarse turquoises. 
perhaps it might be missed by his servant, and questions would 
be asked. he hesitated for a moment, then he turned back and took 
it from the table. he could not help seeing the dead thing. 
how still it was! how horribly white the long hands looked! 
it was like a dreadful wax image. 
having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs. 
the woodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain. 
he stopped several times and waited. no: everything was still. 
it was merely the sound of his own footsteps. 
when he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner. 
they must be hidden away somewhere. he unlocked a secret press that was 
in the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious disguises, 
and put them into it. he could easily burn them afterwards. then he pulled 
out his watch. it was twenty minutes to two. 
he sat down and began to think. every year-every month, almost- 
men were strangled in england for what he had done. there had been 
a madness of murder in the air. some red star had come too close 
to the earth. . . . and yet, what evidence was there against him? 
basil hallward had left the house at eleven. no one had seen 
him come in again. most of the servants were at selby royal. 
his valet had gone to bed.... paris! yes. it was to paris that 
basil had gone, and by the midnight train, as he had intended. 
with his curious reserved habits, it would be months before any 
suspicions would be roused. months! everything could be destroyed long 
before then. 
a sudden thought struck him. he put on his fur coat and hat 
and went out into the hall. there he paused, hearing the slow 
heavy tread of the policeman on the pavement outside and 
seeing the flash of the bull's-eye reflected in the window. 
he waited and held his breath. 
after a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, 
shutting the door very gently behind him. then he began 
ringing the bell. in about five minutes his valet appeared, 
half-dressed and looking very drowsy. 
"i am sorry to have had to wake you up, francis," he said, stepping in; 
"but i had forgotten my latch-key. what time is it?" 
"ten minutes past two, sir," answered the man, looking at the clock 
and blinking. 
"ten minutes past two? how horribly late! you must wake me 
at nine to-morrow. i have some work to do." 
"all right, sir." 
"did any one call this evening?" 
"mr. hallward, sir. he stayed here till eleven, and then he went 
away to catch his train." 
"oh! i am sorry i didn't see him. did he leave any message?" 
"no, sir, except that he would write to you from paris, 
if he did not find you at the club." 
"that will do, francis. don't forget to call me at nine to-morrow." 
"no, sir." 
the man shambled down the passage in his slippers. 
dorian gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed 
into the library. for a quarter of an hour he walked up and down 
the room, biting his lip and thinking. then he took down the blue 
book from one of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves. 
"alan campbell, 152, hertford street, mayfair." yes; that was the man 
he wanted. 
chapter 14 
at nine o'clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of chocolate 
on a tray and opened the shutters. dorian was sleeping quite peacefully, 
lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his cheek. he looked 
like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study. 
the man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, 
and as he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, 
as though he had been lost in some delightful dream. yet he had 
not dreamed at all. his night had been untroubled by any images 
of pleasure or of pain. but youth smiles without any reason. 
it is one of its chiefest charms. 
he turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his chocolate. 
the mellow november sun came streaming into the room. the sky was bright, 
and there was a genial warmth in the air. it was almost like a morning 
in may. 
gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent, 
blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves 
there with terrible distinctness. he winced at the memory of all 
that he had suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling 
of loathing for basil hallward that had made him kill him as he sat 
in the chair came back to him, and he grew cold with passion. 
the dead man was still sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now. 
how horrible that was! such hideous things were for the darkness, 
not for the day. 
he felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken 
or grow mad. there were sins whose fascination was more in the memory 
than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratified the pride more 
than the passions, and gave to the intellect a quickened sense of joy, 
greater than any joy they brought, or could ever bring, to the senses. 
but this was not one of them. it was a thing to be driven out of the mind, 
to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it might strangle 
one itself. 
when the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, 
and then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his 
usual care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie 
and scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once. he spent a long 
time also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his 
valet about some new liveries that he was thinking of getting made 
for the servants at selby, and going through his correspondence. 
at some of the letters, he smiled. three of them bored him. 
one he read several times over and then tore up with a slight look 
of annoyance in his face. "that awful thing, a woman's memory!" 
as lord henry had once said. 
after he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his 
lips slowly with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, 
and going over to the table, sat down and wrote two letters. 
one he put in his pocket, the other he handed to the valet. 
"take this round to 152, hertford street, francis, and if mr. campbell 
is out of town, get his address." 
as soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon 
a piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits of architecture, 
and then human faces. suddenly he remarked that every face that 
he drew seemed to have a fantastic likeness to basil hallward. 
he frowned, and getting up, went over to the book-case and took 
out a volume at hazard. he was determined that he would not think 
about what had happened until it became absolutely necessary that 
he should do so. 
when he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at 
the title-page of the book. it was gautier's emaux et camees, 
charpentier's japanese-paper edition, with the jacquemart etching. 
the binding was of citron-green leather, with a design of gilt 
trellis-work and dotted pomegranates. it had been given 
to him by adrian singleton. as he turned over the pages, 
his eye fell on the poem about the hand of lacenaire, 
the cold yellow hand "du supplice encore mal lavee," 
with its downy red hairs and its "doigts de faune." he glanced 
at his own white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite 
of himself, and passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas 
upon venice: 
sur une gamme chromatique, 
le sein de peries ruisselant, 
la venus de l'adriatique 
sort de l'eau son corps rose et blanc. 
les domes, sur l'azur des ondes 
suivant la phrase au pur contour, 
s'enflent comme des gorges rondes 
que souleve un soupir d'amour. 
l'esquif aborde et me depose, 
jetant son amarre au pilier, 
devant une facade rose, 
sur le marbre d'un escalier. 
how exquisite they were! as one read them, one seemed to be 
floating down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, 
seated in a black gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains. 
the mere lines looked to him like those straight lines of 
turquoise-blue that follow one as one pushes out to the lido. 
the sudden flashes of colour reminded him of the gleam of 
the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the tall 
honeycombed campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, 
through the dim, dust-stained arcades. leaning back with 
half-closed eyes, he kept saying over and over to himself: 
"devant une facade rose, 
sur le marbre d'un escalier." 
the whole of venice was in those two lines. he remembered the autumn 
that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred 
him to mad delightful follies. there was romance in every place. 
but venice, like oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, 
to the true romantic, background was everything, or almost everything. 
basil had been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over tintoret. 
poor basil! what a horrible way for a man to die! 
he sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget. 
he read of the swallows that fly in and out of the little 
cafe at smyrna where the hadjis sit counting their amber 
beads and the turbaned merchants smoke their long tasselled 
pipes and talk gravely to each other; he read of the obelisk 
in the place de la concorde that weeps tears of granite 
in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by the hot, 
lotus-covered nile, where there are sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, 
and white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with 
small beryl eyes that crawl over the green steaming mud; 
he began to brood over those verses which, drawing music 
from kiss-stained marble, tell of that curious statue that 
gautier compares to a contralto voice, the "monstre charmant" 
that couches in the porphyry-room of the louvre. but after a time 
the book fell from his hand. he grew nervous, and a horrible 
fit of terror came over him. what if alan campbell should be 
out of england? days would elapse before he could come back. 
perhaps he might refuse to come. what could he do then? 
every moment was of vital importance. 
they had been great friends once, five years before- 
almost inseparable, indeed. then the intimacy had come suddenly 
to an end. when they met in society now, it was only dorian 
gray who smiled: alan campbell never did. 
he was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real 
appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense 
of the beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely 
from dorian. his dominant intellectual passion was for science. 
at cambridge he had spent a great deal of his time working 
in the laboratory, and had taken a good class in the natural 
science tripos of his year. indeed, he was still devoted 
to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his 
own in which he used to shut himself up all day long, 
greatly to the annoyance of his mother, who had set her 
heart on his standing for parliament and had a vague idea 
that a chemist was a person who made up prescriptions. 
he was an excellent musician, however, as well, and played 
both the violin and the piano better than most amateurs. 
in fact, it was music that had first brought him and dorian 
gray together-music and that indefinable attraction that 
dorian seemed to be able to exercise whenever he wished- 
and, indeed, exercised often without being conscious of it. 
they had met at lady berkshire's the night that rubinstein 
played there, and after that used to be always seen together 
at the opera and wherever good music was going on. 
for eighteen months their intimacy lasted. campbell was 
always either at selby royal or in grosvenor square. 
to him, as to many others, dorian gray was the type 
of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in life. 
whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one 
ever knew. but suddenly people remarked that they scarcely 
spoke when they met and that campbell seemed always to go 
away early from any party at which dorian gray was present. 
he had changed, too-was strangely melancholy at times, appeared 
almost to dislike hearing music, and would never himself play, 
giving as his excuse, when he was called upon, that he was so 
absorbed in science that he had no time left in which to practise. 
and this was certainly true. every day he seemed to become 
more interested in biology, and his name appeared once or twice 
in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain 
curious experiments. 
this was the man dorian gray was waiting for. every second 
he kept glancing at the clock. as the minutes went by he became 
horribly agitated. at last he got up and began to pace up 
and down the room, looking like a beautiful caged thing. 
he took long stealthy strides. his hands were curiously cold. 
the suspense became unbearable. time seemed to him to be crawling 
with feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards 
the jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice. he knew what was 
waiting for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank 
hands his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain 
of sight and driven the eyeballs back into their cave. it was useless. 
the brain had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, 
made grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain, 
danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving masks. 
then, suddenly, time stopped for him. yes: that blind, slow-breathing thing 
crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being dead, raced nimbly on 
in front, and dragged a hideous future from its grave, and showed it to him. 
he stared at it. its very horror made him stone. 
at last the door opened and his servant entered. he turned 
glazed eyes upon him. 
"mr. campbell, sir," said the man. 
a sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came 
back to his cheeks. 
"ask him to come in at once, francis." he felt that he was himself again. 
his mood of cowardice had passed away. 
the man bowed and retired. in a few moments, alan campbell walked in, 
looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensified by his 
coal-black hair and dark eyebrows. 
"alan! this is kind of you. i thank you for coming." 
"i had intended never to enter your house again, gray. but you said 
it was a matter of life and death." his voice was hard and cold. 
he spoke with slow deliberation. there was a look of contempt 
in the steady searching gaze that he turned on dorian. 
he kept his hands in the pockets of his astrakhan coat, and seemed 
not to have noticed the gesture with which he had been greeted. 
"yes: it is a matter of life and death, alan, and to more than one person. 
sit down." 
campbell took a chair by the table, and dorian sat opposite to him. 
the two men's eyes met. in dorian's there was infinite pity. 
he knew that what he was going to do was dreadful. 
after a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, 
very quietly, but watching the effect of each word upon the face 
of him he had sent for, "alan, in a locked room at the top 
of this house, a room to which nobody but myself has access, 
a dead man is seated at a table. he has been dead ten hours now. 
don't stir, and don't look at me like that. who the man is, 
why he died, how he died, are matters that do not concern you. 
what you have to do is this-" 
"stop, gray. i don't want to know anything further. 
whether what you have told me is true or not true doesn't 
concern me. i entirely decline to be mixed up in your life. 
keep your horrible secrets to yourself. they don't interest me 
any more." 
"alan, they will have to interest you. this one will have to interest you. 
i am awfully sorry for you, alan. but i can't help myself. 
you are the one man who is able to save me. i am forced to bring 
you into the matter. i have no option. alan, you are scientific. 
you know about chemistry and things of that kind. you have made experiments. 
what you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs- 
to destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left. nobody saw this 
person come into the house. indeed, at the present moment he is supposed 
to be in paris. he will not be missed for months. when he is missed, 
there must be no trace of him found here. you, alan, you must change him, 
and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes that i may 
scatter in the air." 
"you are mad, dorian." 
"ah! i was waiting for you to call me dorian." 
"you are mad, i tell you-mad to imagine that i would raise 
a finger to help you, mad to make this monstrous confession. 
i will have nothing to do with this matter, whatever it is. 
do you think i am going to peril my reputation for you? what is it 
to me what devil's work you are up to?" 
"it was suicide, alan." 
"i am glad of that. but who drove him to it? you, i should fancy." 
"do you still refuse to do this for me?" 
"of course i refuse. i will have absolutely nothing to do with it. 
i don't care what shame comes on you. you deserve it all. 
i should not be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced. 
how dare you ask me, of all men in the world, to mix myself 
up in this horror? i should have thought you knew more about 
people's characters. your friend lord henry wotton can't have 
taught you much about psychology, whatever else he has taught you. 
nothing will induce me to stir a step to help you. you have 
come to the wrong man. go to some of your friends. don't come 
to me." 
"alan, it was murder. i killed him. you don't know what he had made 
me suffer. whatever my life is, he had more to do with the making or 
the marring of it than poor harry has had. he may not have intended it, 
the result was the same." 
"murder! good god, dorian, is that what you have come to? 
i shall not inform upon you. it is not my business. besides, without 
my stirring in the matter, you are certain to be arrested. 
nobody ever commits a crime without doing something stupid. 
but i will have nothing to do with it." 
"you must have something to do with it. wait, wait a moment; 
listen to me. only listen, alan. all i ask of you is to perform 
a certain scientific experiment. you go to hospitals and 
dead-houses, and the horrors that you do there don't affect you. 
if in some hideous dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you 
found this man lying on a leaden table with red gutters scooped 
out in it for the blood to flow through, you would simply look 
upon him as an admirable subject. you would not turn a hair. 
you would not believe that you were doing anything wrong. 
on the contrary, you would probably feel that you were benefiting 
the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the world, 
or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind. 
what i want you to do is merely what you have often done before. 
indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than 
what you are accustomed to work at. and, remember, it is 
the only piece of evidence against me. if it is discovered, 
i am lost; and it is sure to be discovered unless you 
help me." 
"i have no desire to help you. you forget that. i am simply 
indifferent to the whole thing. it has nothing to do with me." 
"alan, i entreat you. think of the position i am in. 
just before you came i almost fainted with terror. 
you may know terror yourself some day. no! don't think of that. 
look at the matter purely from the scientific point of view. 
you don't inquire where the dead things on which you 
experiment come from. don't inquire now. i have told you 
too much as it is. but i beg of you to do this. we were 
friends once, alan." 
"don't speak about those days, dorian-they are dead." 
"the dead linger sometimes. the man upstairs will not go away. 
he is sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms. 
alan! alan! if you don't come to my assistance, i am ruined. 
why, they will hang me, alan! don't you understand? they will hang 
me for what i have done." 
"there is no good in prolonging this scene. i absolutely refuse 
to do anything in the matter. it is insane of you to ask me." 
"you refuse?" 
"yes." 
"i entreat you, alan." 
"it is useless." 
the same look of pity came into dorian gray's eyes. then he stretched 
out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it. 
he read it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the table. 
having done this, he got up and went over to the window. 
campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper, 
and opened it. as he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell 
back in his chair. a horrible sense of sickness came over him. 
he felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some 
empty hollow. 
after two or three minutes of terrible silence, dorian turned round and came 
and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his shoulder. 
"i am so sorry for you, alan," he murmured, "but you leave me 
no alternative. i have a letter written already. here it is. 
you see the address. if you don't help me, i must send it. 
if you don't help me, i will send it. you know what the result will be. 
but you are going to help me. it is impossible for you to refuse now. 
i tried to spare you. you will do me the justice to admit that. 
you were stern, harsh, offensive. you treated me as no man has ever 
dared to treat me-no living man, at any rate. i bore it all. 
now it is for me to dictate terms." 
campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed through him. 
"yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, alan. you know what they are. 
the thing is quite simple. come, don't work yourself into this fever. 
the thing has to be done. face it, and do it." 
a groan broke from campbell's lips and he shivered all over. 
the ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be 
dividing time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was 
too terrible to be borne. he felt as if an iron ring was 
being slowly tightened round his forehead, as if the disgrace 
with which he was threatened had already come upon him. 
the hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead. 
it was intolerable. it seemed to crush him. 
"come, alan, you must decide at once." 
"i cannot do it," he said, mechanically, as though words could alter things. 
"you must. you have no choice. don't delay." 
he hesitated a moment. "is there a fire in the room upstairs?" 
"yes, there is a gas-fire with asbestos." 
"i shall have to go home and get some things from the laboratory." 
"no, alan, you must not leave the house. write out on a sheet 
of notepaper what you want and my servant will take a cab 
and bring the things back to you." 
campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an envelope 
to his assistant. dorian took the note up and read it carefully. 
then he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return 
as soon as possible and to bring the things with him. 
as the hall door shut, campbell started nervously, and having got up 
from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece. he was shivering with 
a kind of ague. for nearly twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke. 
a fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was 
like the beat of a hammer. 
as the chime struck one, campbell turned round, and looking at dorian gray, 
saw that his eyes were filled with tears. there was something in the purity 
and refinement of that sad face that seemed to enrage him. "you are infamous, 
absolutely infamous!" he muttered. 
"hush, alan. you have saved my life," said dorian. 
"your life? good heavens! what a life that is! you have gone from 
corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime. 
in doing what i am going to do-what you force me to do- 
it is not of your life that i am thinking." 
"ah, alan," murmured dorian with a sigh, "i wish you had 
a thousandth part of the pity for me that i have for you." 
he turned away as he spoke and stood looking out at the garden. 
campbell made no answer. 
after about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant entered, 
carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coil of steel and 
platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps. 
"shall i leave the things here, sir?" he asked campbell. 
"yes," said dorian. "and i am afraid, francis, that i have another 
errand for you. what is the name of the man at richmond who supplies 
selby with orchids?" 
"harden, sir." 
"yes-harden. you must go down to richmond at once, see harden personally, 
and tell him to send twice as many orchids as i ordered, and to have 
as few white ones as possible. in fact, i don't want any white ones. 
it is a lovely day, francis, and richmond is a very pretty place- 
otherwise i wouldn't bother you about it." 
"no trouble, sir. at what time shall i be back?" 
dorian looked at campbell. "how long will your experiment take, alan?" 
he said in a calm indifferent voice. the presence of a third person 
in the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage. 
campbell frowned and bit his lip. "it will take about five hours," 
he answered. 
"it will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven, francis. 
or stay: just leave my things out for dressing. you can have the evening 
to yourself. i am not dining at home, so i shall not want you." 
"thank you, sir," said the man, leaving the room. 
"now, alan, there is not a moment to be lost. how heavy this chest is! 
i'll take it for you. you bring the other things." he spoke rapidly 
and in an authoritative manner. campbell felt dominated by him. 
they left the room together. 
when they reached the top landing, dorian took out the key and turned it 
in the lock. then he stopped, and a troubled look came into his eyes. 
he shuddered. "i don't think i can go in, alan," he murmured. 
"it is nothing to me. i don't require you," said campbell coldly. 
dorian half opened the door. as he did so, he saw the face 
of his portrait leering in the sunlight. on the floor in front 
of it the torn curtain was lying. he remembered that the night 
before he had forgotten, for the first time in his life, 
to hide the fatal canvas, and was about to rush forward, 
when he drew back with a shudder. 
what was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, 
on one of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood? 
how horrible it was!-more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, 
than the silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table, 
the thing whose grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet 
showed him that it had not stirred, but was still there, as he had 
left it. 
he heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, 
and with half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, 
determined that he would not look even once upon the dead man. 
then, stooping down and taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, 
he flung it right over the picture. 
there he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes 
fixed themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him. 
he heard campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, 
and the other things that he had required for his dreadful work. 
he began to wonder if he and basil hallward had ever met, and, if so, 
what they had thought of each other. 
"leave me now," said a stern voice behind him. 
he turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man 
had been thrust back into the chair and that campbell was gazing 
into a glistening yellow face. as he was going downstairs, 
he heard the key being turned in the lock. 
it was long after seven when campbell came back into the library. 
he was pale, but absolutely calm. "i have done what you asked 
me to do," he muttered "and now, good-bye. let us never see each 
other again." 
"you have saved me from ruin, alan. i cannot forget that," 
said dorian simply. 
as soon as campbell had left, he went upstairs. there was a horrible 
smell of nitric acid in the room. but the thing that had been sitting 
at the table was gone. 
chapter 15 
that evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large 
button-hole of parma violets, dorian gray was ushered into lady 
narborough's drawing-room by bowing servants. his forehead was throbbing 
with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his manner 
as he bent over his hostess's hand was as easy and graceful as ever. 
perhaps one never seems so much at one's ease as when one has to play a part. 
certainly no one looking at dorian gray that night could have believed 
that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any tragedy of our age. 
those finely shaped fingers could never have clutched a knife for sin, 
nor those smiling lips have cried out on god and goodness. he himself 
could not help wondering at the calm of his demeanour, and for a moment 
felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a double life. 
it was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by lady narborough, 
who was a very clever woman with what lord henry used to describe 
as the remains of really remarkable ugliness. she had proved 
an excellent wife to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having 
buried her husband properly in a marble mausoleum, which she 
had herself designed, and married off her daughters to some rich, 
rather elderly men, she devoted herself now to the pleasures 
of french fiction, french cookery, and french esprit when she could 
get it. 
dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him 
that she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life. 
"i know, my dear, i should have fallen madly in love with you," 
she used to say, "and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake. 
it is most fortunate that you were not thought of at the time. 
as it was, our bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were 
so occupied in trying to raise the wind, that i never had even a 
flirtation with anybody. however, that was all narborough's fault. 
he was dreadfully short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking 
in a husband who never sees anything." 
her guests this evening were rather tedious. the fact was, 
as she explained to dorian, behind a very shabby fan, 
one of her married daughters had come up quite suddenly to stay 
with her, and, to make matters worse, had actually brought her 
husband with her. "i think it is most unkind of her, my dear," 
she whispered. "of course i go and stay with them every summer 
after i come from homburg, but then an old woman like me must 
have fresh air sometimes, and besides, i really wake them up. 
you don't know what an existence they lead down there. 
it is pure unadulterated country life. they get up early, 
because they have so much to do, and go to bed early, 
because they have so little to think about. there has not been 
a scandal in the neighbourhood since the time of queen elizabeth, 
and consequently they all fall asleep after dinner. 
you shan't sit next either of them. you shall sit by me and 
amuse me." 
dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round 
the room. yes: it was certainly a tedious party. 
two of the people he had never seen before, and the others 
consisted of ernest harrowden, one of those middle-aged 
mediocrities so common in london clubs who have no enemies, 
but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; lady ruxton, 
an overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, 
who was always trying to get herself compromised, but was 
so peculiarly plain that to her great disappointment no 
one would ever believe anything against her; mrs. erlynne, 
a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and venetian-red hair; 
lady alice chapman, his hostess's daughter, a dowdy dull girl, 
with one of those characteristic british faces that, once seen, 
are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked, 
white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class, 
was under the impression that inordinate joviality can atone for 
an entire lack of ideas. 
he was rather sorry he had come, till lady narborough, 
looking at the great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy 
curves on the mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed: "how horrid 
of henry wotton to be so late! i sent round to him this morning 
on chance and he promised faithfully not to disappoint me." 
it was some consolation that harry was to be there, and when the door opened 
and he heard his slow musical voice lending charm to some insincere apology, 
he ceased to feel bored. 
but at dinner he could not eat anything. plate after plate went 
away untasted. lady narborough kept scolding him for what she 
called "an insult to poor adolphe, who invented the menu 
specially for you," and now and then lord henry looked across 
at him, wondering at his silence and abstracted manner. 
from time to time the butler filled his glass with champagne. 
he drank eagerly, and his thirst seemed to increase. 
"dorian," said lord henry at last, as the chaud-froid was being handed round, 
"what is the matter with you to-night? you are quite out of sorts." 
"i believe he is in love," cried lady narborough, "and that he is 
afraid to tell me for fear i should be jealous. he is quite right. 
i certainly should." 
"dear lady narborough," murmured dorian, smiling, "i have not been in love 
for a whole week-not, in fact, since madame de ferrol left town." 
"how you men can fall in love with that woman!" exclaimed the old lady. 
"i really cannot understand it." 
"it is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl, 
lady narborough," said lord henry. "she is the one link between us 
and your short frocks." 
"she does not remember my short frocks at all, lord henry. 
but i remember her very well at vienna thirty years ago, 
and how decolletee she was then." 
"she is still decolletee," he answered, taking an olive in his long fingers; 
"and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an edition de luxe 
of a bad french novel. she is really wonderful, and full of surprises. 
her capacity for family affection is extraordinary. when her third husband 
died, her hair turned quite gold from grief." 
"how can you, harry!" cried dorian. 
"it is a most romantic explanation," laughed the hostess. 
"but her third husband, lord henry! you don't mean to say ferrol 
is the fourth?" 
"certainly, lady narborough." 
"i don't believe a word of it." 
"well, ask mr. gray. he is one of her most intimate friends." 
"is it true, mr. gray?" 
"she assures me so, lady narborough," said dorian. "i asked her whether, 
like marguerite de navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and hung at 
her girdle. she told me she didn't, because none of them had had any 
hearts at all." 
"four husbands! upon my word that is trop de zele." 
"trop d'audace, i tell her," said dorian. 
"oh! she is audacious enough for anything, my dear. and what is ferrol like? 
i don't know him." 
"the husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes," 
said lord henry, sipping his wine. 
lady narborough hit him with her fan. "lord henry, i am not at all surprised 
that the world says that you are extremely wicked." 
"but what world says that?" asked lord henry, elevating his eyebrows. 
"it can only be the next world. this world and i are on excellent terms." 
"everybody i know says you are very wicked," cried the old lady, 
shaking her head. 
lord henry looked serious for some moments. "it is perfectly monstrous," 
he said, at last, "the way people go about nowadays saying things against one 
behind one's back that are absolutely and entirely true." 
"isn't he incorrigible?" cried dorian, leaning forward in his chair. 
"i hope so," said his hostess, laughing. "but really, 
if you all worship madame de ferrol in this ridiculous way, 
i shall have to marry again so as to be in the fashion." 
"you will never marry again, lady narborough," broke in lord henry. 
"you were far too happy. when a woman marries again, it is 
because she detested her first husband. when a man marries again, 
it is because he adored his first wife. women try their luck; 
men risk theirs." 
"narborough wasn't perfect," cried the old lady. 
"if he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady," 
was the rejoinder. "women love us for our defects. 
if we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything, 
even our intellects. you will never ask me to dinner again 
after saying this, i am afraid, lady narborough, but it is 
quite true." 
"of course it is true, lord henry. if we women did not love you for 
your defects, where would you all be? not one of you would ever be married. 
you would be a set of unfortunate bachelors. not, however, that that 
would alter you much. nowadays all the married men live like bachelors, 
and all the bachelors like married men." 
"fin de siecle," murmured lord henry. 
"fin du globe," answered his hostess. 
"i wish it were fin du globe," said dorian with a sigh. 
"life is a great disappointment." 
"ah, my dear," cried lady narborough, putting on her gloves, 
"don't tell me that you have exhausted life. when a man says that 
one knows that life has exhausted him. lord henry is very wicked, 
and i sometimes wish that i had been; but you are made to be good- 
you look so good. i must find you a nice wife. lord henry, don't you 
think that mr. gray should get married?" 
"i am always telling him so, lady narborough," said lord henry with a bow. 
"well, we must look out for a suitable match for him. 
i shall go through debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list 
of all the eligible young ladies." 
"with their ages, lady narborough?" asked dorian. 
"of course, with their ages, slightly edited. but nothing must be done 
in a hurry. i want it to be what the morning post calls a suitable alliance, 
and i want you both to be happy." 
"what nonsense people talk about happy marriages!" exclaimed lord henry. 
"a man can be happy with any woman, as long as he does not love her." 
"ah! what a cynic you are!" cried the old lady, pushing back her chair 
and nodding to lady ruxton. "you must come and dine with me soon again. 
you are really an admirable tonic, much better than what sir andrew prescribes 
for me. you must tell me what people you would like to meet, though. i want 
it to be a delightful gathering." 
"i like men who have a future and women who have a past," he answered. 
"or do you think that would make it a petticoat party?" 
"i fear so," she said, laughing, as she stood up. "a thousand pardons, 
my dear lady ruxton," she added, "i didn't see you hadn't finished 
your cigarette." 
"never mind, lady narborough. i smoke a great deal too much. 
i am going to limit myself, for the future." 
"pray don't, lady ruxton," said lord henry. "moderation is a fatal thing. 
enough is as bad as a meal. more than enough is as good as a feast." 
lady ruxton glanced at him curiously. "you must come and explain that to me 
some afternoon, lord henry. it sounds a fascinating theory," she murmured, 
as she swept out of the room. 
"now, mind you don't stay too long over your politics and scandal," 
cried lady narborough from the door. "if you do, we are sure to 
squabble upstairs." 
the men laughed, and mr. chapman got up solemnly 
from the foot of the table and came up to the top. 
dorian gray changed his seat and went and sat by lord henry. 
mr. chapman began to talk in a loud voice about the situation 
in the house of commons. he guffawed at his adversaries. 
the word doctrinaire-word full of terror to the british mind- 
reappeared from time to time between his explosions. 
an alliterative prefix served as an ornament of oratory. 
he hoisted the union jack on the pinnacles of thought. 
the inherited stupidity of the race-sound english common sense 
he jovially termed it-was shown to be the proper bulwark 
for society. 
a smile curved lord henry's lips, and he turned round and looked at dorian. 
"are you better, my dear fellow?" he asked. "you seemed rather 
out of sorts at dinner." 
"i am quite well, harry. i am tired. that is all." 
"you were charming last night. the little duchess is quite devoted to you. 
she tells me she is going down to selby." 
"she has promised to come on the twentieth." 
"is monmouth to be there, too?" 
"oh, yes, harry." 
"he bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her. she is very clever, 
too clever for a woman. she lacks the indefinable charm of weakness. 
it is the feet of clay that make the gold of the image precious. her feet 
are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay. white porcelain feet, 
if you like. they have been through the fire, and what fire does not destroy, 
it hardens. she has had experiences." 
"how long has she been married?" asked dorian. 
"an eternity, she tells me. i believe, according to the peerage, 
it is ten years, but ten years with monmouth must have been like eternity, 
with time thrown in. who else is coming?" 
"oh, the willoughbys, lord rugby and his wife, our hostess, 
geoffrey clouston, the usual set. i have asked lord grotrian." 
"i like him," said lord henry. "a great many people don't, but i find 
him charming. he atones for being occasionally somewhat overdressed 
by being always absolutely over-educated. he is a very modern type." 
"i don't know if he will be able to come, harry. he may have to go to monte 
carlo with his father." 
"ah! what a nuisance people's people are! try and make him come. 
by the way, dorian, you ran off very early last night. 
you left before eleven. what did you do afterwards? did you go 
straight home?" 
dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned. 
"no, harry," he said at last, "i did not get home till nearly three." 
"did you go to the club?" 
"yes," he answered. then he bit his lip. "no, i don't mean that. 
i didn't go to the club. i walked about. i forget what i did. 
. . . how inquisitive you are, harry! you always want to know what 
one has been doing. i always want to forget what i have been doing. 
i came in at half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time. 
i had left my latch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in. 
if you want any corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask 
him." 
lord henry shrugged his shoulders. "my dear fellow, as if i cared! 
let us go up to the drawing-room. no sherry, thank you, mr. chapman. 
something has happened to you, dorian. tell me what it is. 
you are not yourself to-night." 
"don't mind me, harry. i am irritable, and out of temper. 
i shall come round and see you to-morrow, or next day. 
make my excuses to lady narborough. i shan't go upstairs. 
i shall go home. i must go home." 
"all right, dorian. i dare say i shall see you to-morrow at tea-time. 
the duchess is coming." 
"i will try to be there, harry," he said, leaving the room. 
as he drove back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense 
of terror he thought he had strangled had come back to him. 
lord henry's casual questioning had made him lose his 
nerves for the moment, and he wanted his nerve still. 
things that were dangerous had to be destroyed. he winced. 
he hated the idea of even touching them. 
yet it had to be done. he realized that, and when he had 
locked the door of his library, he opened the secret press 
into which he had thrust basil hallward's coat and bag. 
a huge fire was blazing. he piled another log on it. 
the smell of the singeing clothes and burning leather was horrible. 
it took him three-quarters of an hour to consume everything. 
at the end he felt faint and sick, and having lit some algerian 
pastilles in a pierced copper brazier, he bathed his hands and 
forehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar. 
suddenly he started. his eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawed 
nervously at his underlip. between two of the windows stood a large 
florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid with ivory and blue lapis. 
he watched it as though it were a thing that could fascinate and make afraid, 
as though it held something that he longed for and yet almost loathed. 
his breath quickened. a mad craving came over him. he lit a cigarette 
and then threw it away. his eyelids drooped till the long fringed 
lashes almost touched his cheek. but he still watched the cabinet. 
at last he got up from the sofa on which he had been lying, 
went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden spring. 
a triangular drawer passed slowly out. his fingers moved instinctively 
towards it, dipped in, and closed on something. it was a small 
chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought, 
the sides patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with 
round crystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads. he opened it. 
inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy 
and persistent. 
he hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his face. 
then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly hot, he drew 
himself up and glanced at the clock. it was twenty minutes to twelve. 
he put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as he did so, and went into 
his bedroom. 
as midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, dorian gray, 
dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his throat, 
crept quietly out of his house. in bond street he found a hansom 
with a good horse. he hailed it and in a low voice gave the driver 
an address. 
the man shook his head. "it is too far for me," he muttered. 
"here is a sovereign for you," said dorian. "you shall have another if you 
drive fast." 
"all right, sir," answered the man, "you will be there in an hour," 
and after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove 
rapidly towards the river. 
chapter 16 
a cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly 
in the dripping mist. the public-houses were just closing, and dim 
men and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors. 
from some of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter. in others, 
drunkards brawled and screamed. 
lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, 
dorian gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame 
of the great city, and now and then he repeated to himself 
the words that lord henry had said to him on the first day 
they had met, "to cure the soul by means of the senses, 
and the senses by means of the soul." yes, that was the secret. 
he had often tried it, and would try it again now. 
there were opium dens where one could buy oblivion, dens of horror 
where the memory of old sins could be destroyed by the madness 
of sins that were new. 
the moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull. from time to time 
a huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it. 
the gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy. 
once the man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile. 
a steam rose from the horse as it splashed up the puddles. 
the sidewindows of the hansom were clogged with a grey-flannel mist. 
"to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses 
by means of the soul!" how the words rang in his ears! 
his soul, certainly, was sick to death. was it true that 
the senses could cure it? innocent blood had been spilled. 
what could atone for that? ah! for that there was no atonement; 
but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness was 
possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp 
the thing out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that 
had stung one. indeed, what right had basil to have spoken 
to him as he had done? who had made him a judge over others? 
he had said things that were dreadful, horrible, not to 
be endured. 
on and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, 
at each step. he thrust up the trap and called to the man 
to drive faster. the hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw 
at him. his throat burned and his delicate hands twitched 
nervously together. he struck at the horse madly with his stick. 
the driver laughed and whipped up. he laughed in answer, 
and the man was silent. 
the way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black 
web of some sprawling spider. the monotony became unbearable, 
and as the mist thickened, he felt afraid. 
then they passed by lonely brickfields. the fog was lighter here, 
and he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange, 
fanlike tongues of fire. a dog barked as they went by, 
and far away in the darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed. 
the horse stumbled in a rut, then swerved aside and broke into 
a gallop. 
after some time they left the clay road and rattled again 
over rough-paven streets. most of the windows were dark, 
but now and then fantastic shadows were silhouetted against 
some lamplit blind. he watched them curiously. they moved 
like monstrous marionettes and made gestures like live things. 
he hated them. a dull rage was in his heart. as they turned 
a corner, a woman yelled something at them from an open door, 
and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred yards. 
the driver beat at them with his whip. 
it is said that passion makes one think in a circle. 
certainly with hideous iteration the bitten lips of dorian gray 
shaped and reshaped those subtle words that dealt with soul 
and sense, till he had found in them the full expression, 
as it were, of his mood, and justified, by intellectual approval, 
passions that without such justification would still have 
dominated his temper. from cell to cell of his brain crept 
the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible 
of all man's appetites, quickened into force each trembling 
nerve and fibre. ugliness that had once been hateful 
to him because it made things real, became dear to him 
now for that very reason. ugliness was the one reality. 
the coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence 
of disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, 
were more vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, 
than all the gracious shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song. 
they were what he needed for forgetfulness. in three days he would 
be free. 
suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane. 
over the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose 
the black masts of ships. wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly 
sails to the yards. 
"somewhere about here, sir, ain't it?" he asked huskily through the trap. 
dorian started and peered round. "this will do," he answered, 
and having got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare 
he had promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay. 
here and there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge merchantman. 
the light shook and splintered in the puddles. a red glare came from 
an outward-bound steamer that was coaling. the slimy pavement looked 
like a wet mackintosh. 
he hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see 
if he was being followed. in about seven or eight minutes he reached 
a small shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories. 
in one of the top-windows stood a lamp. he stopped and gave a 
peculiar knock. 
after a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain 
being unhooked. the door opened quietly, and he went in without 
saying a word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened 
itself into the shadow as he passed. at the end of the hall 
hung a tattered green curtain that swayed and shook in 
the gusty wind which had followed him in from the street. 
he dragged it aside and entered a long low room which looked 
as if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon. shrill 
flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors 
that faced them, were ranged round the walls. greasy reflectors 
of ribbed tin backed them, making quivering disks of light. 
the floor was covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here 
and there into mud, and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor. 
some malays were crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing with 
bone counters and showing their white teeth as they chattered. 
in one corner, with his head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled 
over a table, and by the tawdrily painted bar that ran across one 
complete side stood two haggard women, mocking an old man who was 
brushing the sleeves of his coat with an expression of disgust. 
"he thinks he's got red ants on him," laughed one of them, 
as dorian passed by. the man looked at her in terror and began 
to whimper. 
at the end of the room there was a little staircase, 
leading to a darkened chamber. as dorian hurried up its 
three rickety steps, the heavy odour of opium met him. 
he heaved a deep breath, and his nostrils quivered with pleasure. 
when he entered, a young man with smooth yellow hair, who was 
bending over a lamp lighting a long thin pipe, looked up at him 
and nodded in a hesitating manner. 
"you here, adrian?" muttered dorian. 
"where else should i be?" he answered, listlessly. "none of the chaps 
will speak to me now." 
"i thought you had left england." 
"darlington is not going to do anything. my brother paid the bill at last. 
george doesn't speak to me either. . . . i don't care," he added 
with a sigh. "as long as one has this stuff, one doesn't want friends. 
i think i have had too many friends." 
dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things that 
lay in such fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses. 
the twisted limbs, the gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, 
fascinated him. he knew in what strange heavens they were suffering, 
and what dull hells were teaching them the secret of some new joy. 
they were better off than he was. he was prisoned in thought. 
memory, like a horrible malady, was eating his soul away. from time 
to time he seemed to see the eyes of basil hallward looking at him. 
yet he felt he could not stay. the presence of adrian singleton 
troubled him. he wanted to be where no one would know who he was. 
he wanted to escape from himself. 
"i am going on to the other place," he said after a pause. 
"on the wharf?" 
"yes." 
"that mad-cat is sure to be there. they won't have her in this place now." 
dorian shrugged his shoulders. "i am sick of women who love one. 
women who hate one are much more interesting. besides, the stuff 
is better." 
"much the same." 
"i like it better. come and have something to drink. 
i must have something." 
"i don't want anything," murmured the young man. 
"never mind." 
adrian singleton rose up wearily and followed dorian to the bar. 
a half-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster, grinned a 
hideous greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers 
in front of them. the women sidled up and began to chatter. 
dorian turned his back on them and said something in a low voice to 
adrian singleton. 
a crooked smile, like a malay crease, writhed across the face of one 
of the women. "we are very proud to-night," she sneered. 
"for god's sake don't talk to me," cried dorian, stamping his 
foot on the ground. "what do you want? money? here it is. 
don't ever talk to me again." 
two red sparks flashed for a moment in the woman's sodden eyes, 
then flickered out and left them dull and glazed. she tossed 
her head and raked the coins off the counter with greedy fingers. 
her companion watched her enviously. 
"it's no use," sighed adrian singleton. "i don't care to go back. 
what does it matter? i am quite happy here." 
"you will write to me if you want anything, won't you?" said dorian, 
after a pause. 
"perhaps." 
"good night, then." 
"good night," answered the young man, passing up the steps and wiping 
his parched mouth with a handkerchief. 
dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face. 
as he drew the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from 
the painted lips of the woman who had taken his money. 
"there goes the devil's bargain!" she hiccoughed, in a 
hoarse voice. 
"curse you!" he answered, "don't call me that." 
she snapped her fingers. "prince charming is what you like to be called, 
ain't it?" she yelled after him. 
the drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly round. 
the sound of the shutting of the hall door fell on his ear. he rushed out as 
if in pursuit. 
dorian gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain. 
his meeting with adrian singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered 
if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, 
as basil hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult. 
he bit his lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad. 
yet, after all, what did it matter to him? one's days were too 
brief to take the burden of another's errors on one's shoulders. 
each man lived his own life and paid his own price for living it. 
the only pity was one had to pay so often for a single fault. 
one had to pay over and over again, indeed. in her dealings with man, 
destiny never closed her accounts. 
there are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or for 
what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of the body, 
as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful impulses. 
men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their will. they move 
to their terrible end as automatons move. choice is taken from them, 
and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at all, lives but to give 
rebellion its fascination and disobedience its charm. for all sins, 
as theologians weary not of reminding us, are sins of disobedience. 
when that high spirit, that morning star of evil, fell from heaven, it was 
as a rebel that he fell. 
callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul 
hungry for rebellion, dorian gray hastened on, quickening his 
step as he went, but as he darted aside into a dim archway, 
that had served him often as a short cut to the ill-famed place 
where he was going, he felt himself suddenly seized from behind, 
and before he had time to defend himself, he was thrust back 
against the wall, with a brutal hand round his throat. 
he struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched 
the tightening fingers away. in a second he heard the click 
of a revolver, and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, 
pointing straight at his head, and the dusky form of a short, 
thick-set man facing him. 
"what do you want?" he gasped. 
"keep quiet," said the man. "if you stir, i shoot you." 
"you are mad. what have i done to you?" 
"you wrecked the life of sibyl vane," was the answer, 
"and sibyl vane was my sister. she killed herself. i know it. 
her death is at your door. i swore i would kill you in return. 
for years i have sought you. i had no clue, no trace. 
the two people who could have described you were dead. 
i knew nothing of you but the pet name she used to call you. 
i heard it to-night by chance. make your peace with god, 
for to-night you are going to die." 
dorian gray grew sick with fear. "i never knew her," he stammered. 
"i never heard of her. you are mad." 
"you had better confess your sin, for as sure as i am james vane, 
you are going to die." there was a horrible moment. dorian did 
not know what to say or do. "down on your knees!" growled the man. 
"i give you one minute to make your peace-no more. i go on board 
to-night for india, and i must do my job first. one minute. 
that's all." 
dorian's arms fell to his side. paralysed with terror, he did not 
know what to do. suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain. 
"stop," he cried. "how long ago is it since your sister died? 
quick, tell me!" 
"eighteen years," said the man. "why do you ask me? 
what do years matter?" 
"eighteen years," laughed dorian gray, with a touch of triumph in his voice. 
"eighteen years! set me under the lamp and look at my face!" 
james vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding what was meant. 
then he seized dorian gray and dragged him from the archway. 
dim and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show 
him the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, 
for the face of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom 
of boyhood, all the unstained purity of youth. he seemed little more 
than a lad of twenty summers, hardly older, if older indeed at all, 
than his sister had been when they had parted so many years ago. 
it was obvious that this was not the man who had destroyed 
her life. 
he loosened his hold and reeled back. "my god! my god!" 
he cried, "and i would have murdered you!" 
dorian gray drew a long breath. "you have been on the brink of 
committing a terrible crime, my man," he said, looking at him sternly. 
"let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your 
own hands." 
"forgive me, sir," muttered james vane. "i was deceived. 
a chance word i heard in that damned den set me on the wrong track." 
"you had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may get 
into trouble," said dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly 
down the street. 
james vane stood on the pavement in horror. he was trembling 
from head to foot. after a little while, a black shadow 
that had been creeping along the dripping wall moved out into 
the light and came close to him with stealthy footsteps. 
he felt a hand laid on his arm and looked round with a start. 
it was one of the women who had been drinking at the bar. 
"why didn't you kill him?" she hissed out, putting haggard face 
quite close to his. "i knew you were following him when you 
rushed out from daly's. you fool! you should have killed him. 
he has lots of money, and he's as bad as bad." 
"he is not the man i am looking for," he answered, "and i want 
no man's money. i want a man's life. the man whose life i want 
must be nearly forty now. this one is little more than a boy. 
thank god, i have not got his blood upon my hands." 
the woman gave a bitter laugh. "little more than a boy!" she sneered. 
"why, man, it's nigh on eighteen years since prince charming made me what 
i am." 
"you lie!" cried james vane. 
she raised her hand up to heaven. "before god i am telling the truth," 
she cried. 
"before god?" 
"strike me dumb if it ain't so. he is the worst one that comes here. 
they say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face. it's nigh 
on eighteen years since i met him. he hasn't changed much since then. 
i have, though," she added, with a sickly leer. 
"you swear this?" 
"i swear it," came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth. 
"but don't give me away to him," she whined; "i am afraid of him. 
let me have some money for my night's lodging." 
he broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street, 
but dorian gray had disappeared. when he looked back, the woman had 
vanished also. 
chapter 17 
a week later dorian gray was sitting in the conservatory at selby royal, 
talking to the pretty duchess of monmouth, who with her husband, 
a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests. 
it was tea-time, and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp 
that stood on the table lit up the delicate china and hammered 
silver of the service at which the duchess was presiding. 
her white hands were moving daintily among the cups, and her full red 
lips were smiling at something that dorian had whispered to her. 
lord henry was lying back in a silk-draped wicker chair, looking at them. 
on a peach-coloured divan sat lady narborough, pretending to listen 
to the duke's description of the last brazilian beetle that he had 
added to his collection. three young men in elaborate smoking-suits 
were handing tea-cakes to some of the women. the house-party 
consisted of twelve people, and there were more expected to arrive on 
the next day. 
"what are you two talking about?" said lord henry, strolling over to 
the table and putting his cup down. "i hope dorian has told you about 
my plan for rechristening everything, gladys. it is a delightful idea." 
"but i don't want to be rechristened, harry," rejoined the duchess, 
looking up at him with her wonderful eyes. "i am quite satisfied 
with my own name, and i am sure mr. gray should be satisfied 
with his." 
"my dear gladys, i would not alter either name for the world. 
they are both perfect. i was thinking chiefly of flowers. 
yesterday i cut an orchid, for my button-hole. it was a marvellous 
spotted thing, as effective as the seven deadly sins. 
in a thoughtless moment i asked one of the gardeners what it 
was called. he told me it was a fine specimen of robinsoniana, 
or something dreadful of that kind. it is a sad truth, 
but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to things. 
names are everything. i never quarrel with actions. 
my one quarrel is with words. that is the reason i hate vulgar 
realism in literature. the man who could call a spade a spade 
should be compelled to use one. it is the only thing he is fit 
for." 
"then what should we call you, harry?" she asked. 
"his name is prince paradox," said dorian. 
"i recognize him in a flash," exclaimed the duchess. 
"i won't hear of it," laughed lord henry, sinking into a chair. 
"from a label there is no escape! i refuse the title." 
"royalties may not abdicate," fell as a warning from pretty lips. 
"you wish me to defend my throne, then?" 
"yes." 
"i give the truths of to-morrow." 
"i prefer the mistakes of to-day," she answered. 
"you disarm me, gladys," he cried, catching the wilfulness of her mood. 
"of your shield, harry, not of your spear." 
"i never tilt against beauty," he said, with a wave of his hand. 
"that is your error, harry, believe me. you value beauty far too much." 
"how can you say that? i admit that i think that it is better 
to be beautiful than to be good. but on the other hand, 
no one is more ready than i am to acknowledge that it is better 
to be good than to be ugly." 
"ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?" cried the duchess. 
"what becomes of your simile about the orchid?" 
"ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, gladys. you, as a good tory, 
must not underrate them. beer, the bible, and the seven deadly virtues have 
made our england what she is." 
"you don't like your country, then?" she asked. 
"i live in it." 
"that you may censure it the better." 
"would you have me take the verdict of europe on it?" he inquired. 
"what do they say of us?" 
"that tartuffe has emigrated to england and opened a shop." 
"is that yours, harry?" 
"i give it to you." 
"i could not use it. it is too true." 
"you need not be afraid. our countrymen never recognize a description." 
"they are practical." 
"they are more cunning than practical. when they make up their ledger, 
they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy." 
"still, we have done great things." 
"great things have been thrust on us, gladys." 
"we have carried their burden." 
"only as far as the stock exchange." 
she shook her head. "i believe in the race," she cried. 
"it represents the survival of the pushing." 
"it has development." 
"decay fascinates me more." 
"what of art?" she asked. 
"it is a malady." 
"love?" 
"an illusion." 
"religion?" 
"the fashionable substitute for belief." 
"you are a sceptic." 
"never! scepticism is the beginning of faith." 
"what are you?" 
"to define is to limit." 
"give me a clue." 
"threads snap. you would lose your way in the labyrinth." 
"you bewilder me. let us talk of some one else." 
"our host is a delightful topic. years ago he was christened 
prince charming." 
"ah! don't remind me of that," cried dorian gray. 
"our host is rather horrid this evening," answered the duchess, colouring. 
"i believe he thinks that monmouth married me on purely scientific principles 
as the best specimen he could find of a modern butterfly." 
"well, i hope he won't stick pins into you, duchess," laughed dorian. 
"oh! my maid does that already, mr. gray, when she is annoyed with me." 
"and what does she get annoyed with you about, duchess?" 
"for the most trivial things, mr. gray, i assure you. 
usually because i come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her 
that i must be dressed by half-past eight." 
"how unreasonable of her! you should give her warning." 
"i daren't, mr. gray. why, she invents hats for me. 
you remember the one i wore at lady hilstone's garden-party? 
you don't, but it is nice of you to pretend that you do. 
well, she made if out of nothing. all good hats are made out 
of nothing." 
"like all good reputations, gladys," interrupted lord henry. 
"every effect that one produces gives one an enemy. 
to be popular one must be a mediocrity." 
"not with women," said the duchess, shaking her head; "and women 
rule the world. i assure you we can't bear mediocrities. 
we women, as some one says, love with our ears, just as you men 
love with your eyes, if you ever love at all." 
"it seems to me that we never do anything else," murmured dorian. 
"ah! then, you never really love, mr. gray," answered the duchess 
with mock sadness. 
"my dear gladys!" cried lord henry. "how can you say that? 
romance lives by repetition, and repetition converts an 
appetite into an art. besides, each time that one loves is 
the only time one has ever loved. difference of object does 
not alter singleness of passion. it merely intensifies it. 
we can have in life but one great experience at best, 
and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often 
as possible." 
"even when one has been wounded by it, harry?" asked the duchess 
after a pause. 
"especially when one has been wounded by it," answered lord henry. 
the duchess turned and looked at dorian gray with a curious 
expression in her eyes. "what do you say to that, mr. gray?" 
she inquired. 
dorian hesitated for a moment. then he threw his head back and laughed. 
"i always agree with harry, duchess." 
"even when he is wrong?" 
"harry is never wrong, duchess." 
"and does his philosophy make you happy?" 
"i have never searched for happiness. who wants happiness? 
i have searched for pleasure." 
"and found it, mr. gray?" 
"often. too often." 
the duchess sighed. "i am searching for peace," she said, 
"and if i don't go and dress, i shall have none this evening." 
"let me get you some orchids, duchess," cried dorian, starting to his feet 
and walking down the conservatory. 
"you are flirting disgracefully with him," said lord henry to his cousin. 
"you had better take care. he is very fascinating." 
"if he were not, there would be no battle." 
"greek meets greek, then?" 
"i am on the side of the trojans. they fought for a woman." 
"they were defeated." 
"there are worse things than capture," she answered. 
"you gallop with a loose rein." 
"pace gives life," was the riposte. 
"i shall write it in my diary to-night." 
"what?" 
"that a burnt child loves the fire." 
"i am not even singed. my wings are untouched." 
"you use them for everything, except flight." 
"courage has passed from men to women. it is a new experience for us." 
"you have a rival." 
"who?" 
he laughed. "lady narborough," he whispered. "she perfectly adores him." 
"you fill me with apprehension. the appeal to antiquity is fatal 
to us who are romanticists." 
"romanticists! you have all the methods of science." 
"men have educated us." 
"but not explained you." 
"describe us as a sex," was her challenge. 
"sphinxes without secrets." 
she looked at him, smiling. "how long mr. gray is!" she said. 
"let us go and help him. i have not yet told him the colour of 
my frock." 
"ah! you must suit your frock to his flowers, gladys." 
"that would be a premature surrender." 
"romantic art begins with its climax." 
"i must keep an opportunity for retreat." 
"in the parthian manner?" 
"they found safety in the desert. i could not do that." 
"women are not always allowed a choice," he answered, but hardly had 
he finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory 
came a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall. 
everybody started up. the duchess stood motionless in horror. 
and with fear in his eyes, lord henry rushed through the flapping 
palms to find dorian gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a 
deathlike swoon. 
he was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid 
upon one of the sofas. after a short time, he came to himself 
and looked round with a dazed expression. 
"what has happened?" he asked. "oh! i remember. am i safe here, harry?" 
he began to tremble. 
"my dear dorian," answered lord henry, "you merely fainted. that was all. 
you must have overtired yourself. you had better not come down to dinner. 
i will take your place." 
"no, i will come down," he said, struggling to his feet. 
"i would rather come down. i must not be alone." 
he went to his room and dressed. there was a wild recklessness 
of gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then 
a thrill of terror ran through him when he remembered that, 
pressed against the window of the conservatory, like a 
white handkerchief, he had seen the face of james vane watching him. 
chapter 18 
the next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most 
of the time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, 
and yet indifferent to life itself. the consciousness of 
being hunted, snared, tracked down, had begun to dominate him. 
if the tapestry did but tremble in the wind, he shook. 
the dead leaves that were blown against the leaded panes seemed 
to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild regrets. 
when he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor's face peering 
through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more to lay its 
hand upon his heart. 
but perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out 
of the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him. 
actual life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical 
in the imagination. it was the imagination that set remorse 
to dog the feet of sin. it was the imagination that made 
each crime bear its misshapen brood. in the common world 
of fact the wicked were not punished, nor the good rewarded. 
success was given to the strong, failure thrust upon the weak. 
that was all. besides, had any stranger been prowling round 
the house, he would have been seen by the servants or the keepers. 
had any foot-marks been found on the flower-beds, the gardeners 
would have reported it. yes, it had been merely fancy. 
sibyl vane's brother had not come back to kill him. 
he had sailed away in his ship to founder in some winter sea. 
from him, at any rate, he was safe. why, the man did not know 
who he was, could not know who he was. the mask of youth had 
saved him. 
and yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it 
was to think that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, 
and give them visible form, and make them move before one! 
what sort of life would his be if, day and night, 
shadows of his crime were to peer at him from silent corners, 
to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear as he sat 
at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep! 
as the thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, 
and the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder. 
oh! in what a wild hour of madness he had killed his friend! 
how ghastly the mere memory of the scene! he saw it all again. 
each hideous detail came back to him with added horror. 
out of the black cave of time, terrible and swathed in scarlet, 
rose the image of his sin. when lord henry came in at 
six o'clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will 
break. 
it was not till the third day that he ventured to go out. 
there was something in the clear, pine-scented air of that 
winter morning that seemed to bring him back his joyousness 
and his ardour for life. but it was not merely the physical 
conditions of environment that had caused the change. 
his own nature had revolted against the excess of anguish 
that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm. 
with subtle and finely wrought temperaments it is always so. 
their strong passions must either bruise or bend. they either 
slay the man, or themselves die. shallow sorrows and shallow 
loves live on. the loves and sorrows that are great are destroyed 
by their own plenitude. besides, he had convinced himself that 
he had been the victim of a terror-stricken imagination, and looked 
back now on his fears with something of pity and not a little 
of contempt. 
after breakfast, he walked with the duchess for an hour in the garden 
and then drove across the park to join the shooting-party. the crisp frost 
lay like salt upon the grass. the sky was an inverted cup of blue metal. 
a thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake. 
at the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of sir geoffrey clouston, 
the duchess's brother, jerking two spent cartridges out of his gun. 
he jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take the mare home, 
made his way towards his guest through the withered bracken and 
rough undergrowth. 
"have you had good sport, geoffrey?" he asked. 
"not very good, dorian. i think most of the birds have gone to the open. 
i dare say it will be better after lunch, when we get to new ground." 
dorian strolled along by his side. the keen aromatic air, 
the brown and red lights that glimmered in the wood, 
the hoarse cries of the beaters ringing out from time to time, 
and the sharp snaps of the guns that followed, fascinated him 
and filled him with a sense of delightful freedom. 
he was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the high 
indifference of joy. 
suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front 
of them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs throwing 
it forward, started a hare. it bolted for a thicket of alders. 
sir geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something 
in the animal's grace of movement that strangely charmed dorian gray, 
and he cried out at once, "don't shoot it, geoffrey. let it live." 
"what nonsense, dorian!" laughed his companion, and as the hare 
bounded into the thicket, he fired. there were two cries heard, 
the cry of a hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, 
which is worse. 
"good heavens! i have hit a beater!" exclaimed sir geoffrey. 
"what an ass the man was to get in front of the guns! 
stop shooting there!" he called out at the top of his voice. 
"a man is hurt." 
the head-keeper came running up with a stick in his hand. 
"where, sir? where is he?" he shouted. at the same time, 
the firing ceased along the line. 
"here," answered sir geoffrey angrily, hurrying towards the thicket. 
"why on earth don't you keep your men back? spoiled my shooting for 
the day." 
dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, 
brushing the lithe swinging branches aside. in a few moments 
they emerged, dragging a body after them into the sunlight. 
he turned away in horror. it seemed to him that misfortune 
followed wherever he went. he heard sir geoffrey ask if the man 
was really dead, and the affirmative answer of the keeper. 
the wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive with faces. 
there was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of voices. 
a great copper-breasted pheasant came beating through the 
boughs overhead. 
after a few moments-that were to him, in his perturbed state, 
like endless hours of pain-he felt a hand laid on his shoulder. 
he started and looked round. 
"dorian," said lord henry, "i had better tell them that the shooting 
is stopped for to-day. it would not look well to go on." 
"i wish it were stopped for ever, harry," he answered bitterly. 
"the whole thing is hideous and cruel. is the man ... ?" 
he could not finish the sentence. 
"i am afraid so," rejoined lord henry. "he got the whole charge of shot 
in his chest. he must have died almost instantaneously. come; let us 
go home." 
they walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly fifty 
yards without speaking. then dorian looked at lord henry and said, 
with a heavy sigh, "it is a bad omen, harry, a very bad omen." 
"what is?" asked lord henry. "oh! this accident, i suppose. 
my dear fellow, it can't be helped. it was the man's own fault. 
why did he get in front of the guns? besides, it is nothing to us. 
it is rather awkward for geoffrey, of course. it does not do to 
pepper beaters. it makes people think that one is a wild shot. 
and geoffrey is not; he shoots very straight. but there is no use talking 
about the matter." 
dorian shook his head. "it is a bad omen, harry. i feel 
as if something horrible were going to happen to some of us. 
to myself, perhaps," he added, passing his hand over his eyes, 
with a gesture of pain. 
the elder man laughed. "the only horrible thing in the world 
is ennui, dorian. that is the one sin for which there is 
no forgiveness. but we are not likely to suffer from it unless 
these fellows keep chattering about this thing at dinner. 
i must tell them that the subject is to be tabooed. 
as for omens, there is no such thing as an omen. 
destiny does not send us heralds. she is too wise or too cruel 
for that. besides, what on earth could happen to you, dorian? 
you have everything in the world that a man can want. 
there is no one who would not be delighted to change places 
with you." 
"there is no one with whom i would not change places, harry. 
don't laugh like that. i am telling you the truth. the wretched 
peasant who has just died is better off than i am. i have no 
terror of death. it is the coming of death that terrifies me. 
its monstrous wings seem to wheel in the leaden air around me. 
good heavens! don't you see a man moving behind the trees there, 
watching me, waiting for me?" 
lord henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hand 
was pointing. "yes," he said, smiling, "i see the gardener waiting for you. 
i suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on the table 
to-night. how absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow! you must come 
and see my doctor, when we get back to town." 
dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener approaching. 
the man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at lord henry in a 
hesitating manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed 
to his master. "her grace told me to wait for an answer," 
he murmured. 
dorian put the letter into his pocket. "tell her grace that i am coming in," 
he said, coldly. the man turned round and went rapidly in the direction of 
the house. 
"how fond women are of doing dangerous things!" laughed lord henry. 
"it is one of the qualities in them that i admire most. a woman 
will flirt with anybody in the world as long as other people are 
looking on." 
"how fond you are of saying dangerous things, harry! in the present instance, 
you are quite astray. i like the duchess very much, but i don't love her." 
"and the duchess loves you very much, but she likes you less, 
so you are excellently matched." 
"you are talking scandal, harry, and there is never any basis for scandal." 
"the basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty," said lord henry, 
lighting a cigarette. 
"you would sacrifice anybody, harry, for the sake of an epigram." 
"the world goes to the altar of its own accord," was the answer. 
"i wish i could love," cried dorian gray with a deep note 
of pathos in his voice. "but i seem to have lost the passion 
and forgotten the desire. i am too much concentrated on myself. 
my own personality has become a burden to me. i want to escape, 
to go away, to forget. it was silly of me to come down here at all. 
i think i shall send a wire to harvey to have the yacht got ready. 
on a yacht one is safe." 
"safe from what, dorian? you are in some trouble. why not tell 
me what it is? you know i would help you." 
"i can't tell you, harry," he answered sadly. "and i dare say it 
is only a fancy of mine. this unfortunate accident has upset me. 
i have a horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen 
to me." 
"what nonsense!" 
"i hope it is, but i can't help feeling it. ah! here is 
the duchess, looking like artemis in a tailor-made gown. 
you see we have come back, duchess." 
"i have heard all about it, mr. gray," she answered. "poor geoffrey is 
terribly upset. and it seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare. 
how curious!" 
"yes, it was very curious. i don't know what made me say it. 
some whim, i suppose. it looked the loveliest of little 
live things. but i am sorry they told you about the man. 
it is a hideous subject." 
"it is an annoying subject," broke in lord henry. "it has no psychological 
value at all. now if geoffrey had done the thing on purpose, how interesting 
he would be! i should like to know some one who had committed a real murder." 
"how horrid of you, harry!" cried the duchess. "isn't it, 
mr. gray? harry, mr. gray is ill again. he is going to faint." 
dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled. "it is nothing, duchess," 
he murmured; "my nerves are dreadfully out of order. that is all. 
i am afraid i walked too far this morning. i didn't hear what harry said. 
was it very bad? you must tell me some other time. i think i must go and 
lie down. you will excuse me, won't you?" 
they had reached the great flight of steps that led from the conservatory 
on to the terrace. as the glass door closed behind dorian, lord henry turned 
and looked at the duchess with his slumberous eyes. "are you very much 
in love with him?" he asked. 
she did not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the landscape. 
"i wish i knew," she said at last. 
he shook his head. "knowledge would be fatal. it is the uncertainty 
that charms one. a mist makes things wonderful." 
"one may lose one's way." 
"all ways end at the same point, my dear gladys." 
"what is that?" 
"disillusion." 
"it was my debut in life," she sighed. 
"it came to you crowned." 
"i am tired of strawberry leaves." 
"they become you." 
"only in public." 
"you would miss them," said lord henry. 
"i will not part with a petal." 
"monmouth has ears." 
"old age is dull of hearing." 
"has he never been jealous?" 
"i wish he had been." 
he glanced about as if in search of something. "what are you looking for?" 
she inquired. 
"the button from your foil," he answered. "you have dropped it." 
she laughed. "i have still the mask." 
"it makes your eyes lovelier," was his reply. 
she laughed again. her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet fruit. 
upstairs, in his own room, dorian gray was lying on a sofa, 
with terror in every tingling fibre of his body. life had suddenly 
become too hideous a burden for him to bear. the dreadful death 
of the unlucky beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, 
had seemed to him to pre-figure death for himself also. 
he had nearly swooned at what lord henry had said in a chance mood 
of cynical jesting. 
at five o'clock he rang his bell for his servant and gave 
him orders to pack his things for the night-express to town, 
and to have the brougham at the door by eight-thirty. he 
was determined not to sleep another night at selby royal. 
it was an ill-omened place. death walked there in the sunlight. 
the grass of the forest had been spotted with blood. 
then he wrote a note to lord henry, telling him that he was going up to town 
to consult his doctor and asking him to entertain his guests in his absence. 
as he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to the door, and his 
valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see him. he frowned and bit 
his lip. "send him in," he muttered, after some moments' hesitation. 
as soon as the man entered, dorian pulled his chequebook out of a drawer 
and spread it out before him. 
"i suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident 
of this morning, thornton?" he said, taking up a pen. 
"yes, sir," answered the gamekeeper. 
"was the poor fellow married? had he any people dependent on him?" 
asked dorian, looking bored. "if so, i should not like them to be left 
in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary." 
"we don't know who he is, sir. that is what i took the liberty 
of coming to you about." 
"don't know who he is?" said dorian, listlessly. "what do you mean? 
wasn't he one of your men?" 
"no, sir. never saw him before. seems like a sailor, sir." 
the pen dropped from dorian gray's hand, and he felt as if his 
heart had suddenly stopped beating. "a sailor?" he cried out. 
"did you say a sailor?" 
"yes, sir. he looks as if he had been a sort of sailor; 
tattooed on both arms, and that kind of thing." 
"was there anything found on him?" said dorian, leaning forward and looking 
at the man with startled eyes. "anything that would tell his name?" 
"some money, sir-not much, and a six-shooter. there was no name of any kind. 
a decent-looking man, sir, but rough-like. a sort of sailor we think." 
dorian started to his feet. a terrible hope fluttered past him. 
he clutched at it madly. "where is the body?" he exclaimed. 
"quick! i must see it at once." 
"it is in an empty stable in the home farm, sir. the folk 
don't like to have that sort of thing in their houses. 
they say a corpse brings bad luck." 
"the home farm! go there at once and meet me. tell one of the grooms 
to bring my horse round. no. never mind. i'll go to the stables myself. 
it will save time." 
in less than a quarter of an hour, dorian gray was galloping down the long 
avenue as hard as he could go. the trees seemed to sweep past him in 
spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his path. 
once the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him. he lashed 
her across the neck with his crop. she cleft the dusky air like an arrow. 
the stones flew from her hoofs. 
at last he reached the home farm. two men were loitering in the yard. 
he leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them. 
in the farthest stable a light was glimmering. something seemed 
to tell him that the body was there, and he hurried to the door 
and put his hand upon the latch. 
there he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink 
of a discovery that would either make or mar his life. 
then he thrust the door open and entered. 
on a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body 
of a man dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers. 
a spotted handkerchief had been placed over the face. 
a coarse candle, stuck in a bottle, sputtered beside it. 
dorian gray shuddered. he felt that his could not be the hand to take 
the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to come 
to him. 
"take that thing off the face. i wish to see it," he said, 
clutching at the door-post for support. 
when the farm-servant had done so, he stepped forward. 
a cry of joy broke from his lips. the man who had been shot in 
the thicket was james vane. 
he stood there for some minutes looking at the dead body. 
as he rode home, his eyes were full of tears, for he knew 
he was safe. 
chapter 19 
"there is no use your telling me that you are going to be good," 
cried lord henry, dipping his white fingers into a red copper bowl 
filled with rose-water. "you are quite perfect. pray, don't change." 
dorian gray shook his head. "no, harry, i have done too many 
dreadful things in my life. i am not going to do any more. 
i began my good actions yesterday." 
"where were you yesterday?" 
"in the country, harry. i was staying at a little inn by myself." 
"my dear boy," said lord henry, smiling, "anybody can be good in the country. 
there are no temptations there. that is the reason why people who live out 
of town are so absolutely uncivilized. civilization is not by any means an 
easy thing to attain to. there are only two ways by which man can reach it. 
one is by being cultured, the other by being corrupt. country people have no 
opportunity of being either, so they stagnate." 
"culture and corruption," echoed dorian. "i have known something of both. 
it seems terrible to me now that they should ever be found together. 
for i have a new ideal, harry. i am going to alter. i think i 
have altered." 
"you have not yet told me what your good action was. 
or did you say you had done more than one?" asked his companion 
as he spilled into his plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded 
strawberries and, through a perforated, shell-shaped spoon, 
snowed white sugar upon them. 
"i can tell you, harry. it is not a story i could tell to any one else. 
i spared somebody. it sounds vain, but you understand what i mean. 
she was quite beautiful and wonderfully like sibyl vane. i think it was 
that which first attracted me to her. you remember sibyl, don't you? 
how long ago that seems! well, hetty was not one of our own class, 
of course. she was simply a girl in a village. but i really loved her. 
i am quite sure that i loved her. all during this wonderful may that we 
have been having, i used to run down and see her two or three times a week. 
yesterday she met me in a little orchard. the apple-blossoms kept tumbling 
down on her hair, and she was laughing. we were to have gone away together 
this morning at dawn. suddenly i determined to leave her as flowerlike as i 
had found her." 
"i should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you 
a thrill of real pleasure, dorian," interrupted lord henry. 
"but i can finish your idyll for you. you gave her good advice 
and broke her heart. that was the beginning of your reformation." 
"harry, you are horrible! you mustn't say these dreadful things. 
hetty's heart is not broken. of course, she cried and all that. 
but there is no disgrace upon her. she can live, like perdita, in her 
garden of mint and marigold." 
"and weep over a faithless florizel," said lord henry, 
laughing, as he leaned back in his chair. "my dear dorian, 
you have the most curiously boyish moods. do you think this girl 
will ever be really content now with any one of her own rank? 
i suppose she will be married some day to a rough carter 
or a grinning ploughman. well, the fact of having met you, 
and loved you, will teach her to despise her husband, 
and she will be wretched. from a moral point of view, 
i cannot say that i think much of your great renunciation. 
even as a beginning, it is poor. besides, how do you know 
that hetty isn't floating at the present moment in some 
starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies round her, 
like ophelia?" 
"i can't bear this, harry! you mock at everything, and then 
suggest the most serious tragedies. i am sorry i told you now. 
i don't care what you say to me. i know i was right in acting 
as i did. poor hetty! as i rode past the farm this morning, 
i saw her white face at the window, like a spray of jasmine. 
don't let us talk about it any more, and don't try to persuade 
me that the first good action i have done for years, 
the first little bit of self-sacrifice i have ever known, 
is really a sort of sin. i want to be better. 
i am going to be better. tell me something about yourself. 
what is going on in town? i have not been to the club 
for days." 
"the people are still discussing poor basil's disappearance." 
"i should have thought they had got tired of that by this time," 
said dorian, pouring himself out some wine and frowning slightly. 
"my dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks, 
and the british public are really not equal to the mental 
strain of having more than one topic every three months. 
they have been very fortunate lately, however. they have 
had my own divorce-case and alan campbell's suicide. 
now they have got the mysterious disappearance of an artist. 
scotland yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster 
who left for paris by the midnight train on the ninth of november 
was poor basil, and the french police declare that basil never 
arrived in paris at all. i suppose in about a fortnight we shall 
be told that he has been seen in san francisco. it is an odd thing, 
but every one who disappears is said to be seen at san francisco. 
it must be a delightful city, and possess all the attractions 
of the next world." 
"what do you think has happened to basil?" asked dorian, 
holding up his burgundy against the light and wondering how it 
was that he could discuss the matter so calmly. 
"i have not the slightest idea. if basil chooses to hide himself, 
it is no business of mine. if he is dead, i don't want to think 
about him. death is the only thing that ever terrifies me. 
i hate it." 
"why?" said the younger man wearily. 
"because," said lord henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt trellis 
of an open vinaigrette box, "one can survive everything nowadays except that. 
death and vulgarity are the only two facts in the nineteenth century that one 
cannot explain away. let us have our coffee in the music-room, dorian. 
you must play chopin to me. the man with whom my wife ran away played 
chopin exquisitely. poor victoria! i was very fond of her. the house 
is rather lonely without her. of course, married life is merely a habit, 
a bad habit. but then one regrets the loss even of one's worst habits. 
perhaps one regrets them the most. they are such an essential part of 
one's personality." 
dorian said nothing, but rose from the table, and passing into the next room, 
sat down to the piano and let his fingers stray across the white and black 
ivory of the keys. after the coffee had been brought in, he stopped, 
and looking over at lord henry, said, "harry, did it ever occur to you that 
basil was murdered?" 
lord henry yawned. "basil was very popular, and always 
wore a waterbury watch. why should he have been murdered? 
he was not clever enough to have enemies. of course, 
he had a wonderful genius for painting. but a man can 
paint like velasquez and yet be as dull as possible. 
basil was really rather dull. he only interested me once, 
and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild 
adoration for you and that you were the dominant motive of 
his art." 
"i was very fond of basil," said dorian with a note of sadness in his voice. 
"but don't people say that he was murdered?" 
"oh, some of the papers do. it does not seem to me to be at all probable. 
i know there are dreadful places in paris, but basil was not the sort of man 
to have gone to them. he had no curiosity. it was his chief defect." 
"what would you say, harry, if i told you that i had murdered basil?" 
said the younger man. he watched him intently after he had spoken. 
"i would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a character 
that doesn't suit you. all crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity 
is crime. it is not in you, dorian, to commit a murder. 
i am sorry if i hurt your vanity by saying so, but i assure you 
it is true. crime belongs exclusively to the lower orders. 
i don't blame them in the smallest degree. i should fancy that 
crime was to them what art is to us, simply a method of procuring 
extraordinary sensations." 
"a method of procuring sensations? do you think, then, that a man 
who has once committed a murder could possibly do the same crime again? 
don't tell me that." 
"oh! anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often," 
cried lord henry, laughing. "that is one of the most important secrets 
of life. i should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake. 
one should never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner. 
but let us pass from poor basil. i wish i could believe that he had 
come to such a really romantic end as you suggest, but i can't. i 
dare say he fell into the seine off an omnibus and that the conductor 
hushed up the scandal. yes: i should fancy that was his end. 
i see him lying now on his back under those dull-green waters, 
with the heavy barges floating over him and long weeds catching 
in his hair. do you know, i don't think he would have done much 
more good work. during the last ten years his painting had gone off 
very much." 
dorian heaved a sigh, and lord henry strolled across the room 
and began to stroke the head of a curious java parrot, a large, 
grey-plumaged bird with pink crest and tail, that was balancing 
itself upon a bamboo perch. as his pointed fingers touched it, 
it dropped the white scurf of crinkled lids over black, 
glasslike eyes and began to sway backwards and forwards. 
"yes," he continued, turning round and taking his handkerchief 
out of his pocket; "his painting had quite gone off. 
it seemed to me to have lost something. it had lost an ideal. 
when you and he ceased to be great friends, he ceased to be a 
great artist. what was it separated you? i suppose he bored you. 
if so, he never forgave you. it's a habit bores have. 
by the way, what has become of that wonderful portrait 
he did of you? i don't think i have ever seen it since 
he finished it. oh! i remember your telling me years ago 
that you had sent it down to selby, and that it had got mislaid 
or stolen on the way. you never got it back? what a pity! 
it was really a masterpiece. i remember i wanted to buy it. 
i wish i had now. it belonged to basil's best period. 
since then, his work was that curious mixture of bad painting 
and good intentions that always entitles a man to be called 
a representative british artist. did you advertise for it? 
you should." 
"i forget," said dorian. "i suppose i did. but i never really liked it. 
i am sorry i sat for it. the memory of the thing is hateful to me. 
why do you talk of it? it used to remind me of those curious lines 
in some play-hamlet, i think-how do they run?- 
"like the painting of a sorrow, 
a face without a heart." 
yes: that is what it was like." 
lord henry laughed. "if a man treats life artistically, 
his brain is his heart," he answered, sinking into an arm-chair. 
dorian gray shook his head and struck some soft chords on the piano. 
"'like the painting of a sorrow,'" he repeated, "'a face without 
a heart.'" 
the elder man lay back and looked at him with half-closed eyes. 
"by the way, dorian," he said after a pause, "'what does it profit 
a man if he gain the whole world and lose-how does the quotation run?- 
his own soul'?" 
the music jarred, and dorian gray started and stared at his friend. 
"why do you ask me that, harry?" 
"my dear fellow," said lord henry, elevating his eyebrows in surprise, 
"i asked you because i thought you might be able to give me an answer. 
that is all. i was going through the park last sunday, and close by the 
marble arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-looking people listening 
to some vulgar street-preacher. as i passed by, i heard the man yelling 
out that question to his audience. it struck me as being rather dramatic. 
london is very rich in curious effects of that kind. a wet sunday, 
an uncouth christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sickly white faces under 
a broken roof of dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful phrase flung into 
the air by shrill hysterical lips-it was really very good in its way, 
quite a suggestion. i thought of telling the prophet that art had 
a soul, but that man had not. i am afraid, however, he would not have 
understood me." 
"don't, harry. the soul is a terrible reality. it can be bought, 
and sold, and bartered away. it can be poisoned, or made perfect. 
there is a soul in each one of us. i know it." 
"do you feel quite sure of that, dorian?" 
"quite sure." 
"ah! then it must be an illusion. the things one feels 
absolutely certain about are never true. that is the fatality 
of faith, and the lesson of romance. how grave you are! 
don't be so serious. what have you or i to do with the superstitions 
of our age? no: we have given up our belief in the soul. 
play me something. play me a nocturne, dorian, and, as you play, 
tell me, in a low voice, how you have kept your youth. 
you must have some secret. i am only ten years older than 
you are, and i am wrinkled, and worn, and yellow. you are 
really wonderful, dorian. you have never looked more charming 
than you do to-night. you remind me of the day i saw you first. 
you were rather cheeky, very shy, and absolutely extraordinary. 
you have changed, of course, but not in appearance. 
i wish you would tell me your secret. to get back my youth 
i would do anything in the world, except take exercise, 
get up early, or be respectable. youth! there is nothing 
like it. it's absurd to talk of the ignorance of youth. 
the only people to whose opinions i listen now with any respect 
are people much younger than myself. they seem in front of me. 
life has revealed to them her latest wonder. as for the aged, 
i always contradict the aged. i do it on principle. 
if you ask them their opinion on something that happened yesterday, 
they solemnly give you the opinions current in 1820, 
when people wore high stocks, believed in everything, and knew 
absolutely nothing. how lovely that thing you are playing is! 
i wonder, did chopin write it at majorca, with the sea weeping 
round the villa and the salt spray dashing against the panes? 
it is marvellously romantic. what a blessing it is 
that there is one art left to us that is not imitative! 
don't stop. i want music to-night. it seems to me that you 
are the young apollo and that i am marsyas listening to you. 
i have sorrows, dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of. 
the tragedy of old age is not that one is old, but that one 
is young. i am amazed sometimes at my own sincerity. 
ah, dorian, how happy you are! what an exquisite life 
you have had! you have drunk deeply of everything. 
you have crushed the grapes against your palate. nothing has 
been hidden from you. and it has all been to you no more than 
the sound of music. it has not marred you. you are still the 
same." 
"i am not the same, harry." 
"yes, you are the same. i wonder what the rest of your life will be. 
don't spoil it by renunciations. at present you are a perfect type. 
don't make yourself incomplete. you are quite flawless now. 
you need not shake your head: you know you are. besides, dorian, 
don't deceive yourself. life is not governed by will or intention. 
life is a question of nerves, and fibres, and slowly built-up 
cells in which thought hides itself and passion has its dreams. 
you may fancy yourself safe and think yourself strong. but a chance 
tone of colour in a room or a morning sky, a particular perfume 
that you had once loved and that brings subtle memories with it, 
a line from a forgotten poem that you had come across again, 
a cadence from a piece of music that you had ceased to play- 
i tell you, dorian, that it is on things like these that our lives depend. 
browning writes about that somewhere; but our own senses will imagine 
them for us. there are moments when the odour of lilas blanc passes 
suddenly across me, and i have to live the strangest month of my life 
over again. i wish i could change places with you, dorian. the world 
has cried out against us both, but it has always worshipped you. 
it always will worship you. you are the type of what the age 
is searching for, and what it is afraid it has found. i am 
so glad that you have never done anything, never carved a statue, 
or painted a picture, or produced anything outside of yourself! 
life has been your art. you have set yourself to music. your days are 
your sonnets." 
dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand through his hair. 
"yes, life has been exquisite," he murmured, "but i am not going 
to have the same life, harry. and you must not say these 
extravagant things to me. you don't know everything about me. 
i think that if you did, even you would turn from me. you laugh. 
don't laugh." 
"why have you stopped playing, dorian? go back and give me 
the nocturne over again. look at that great, honey-coloured moon 
that hangs in the dusky air. she is waiting for you to charm her, 
and if you play she will come closer to the earth. you won't? 
let us go to the club, then. it has been a charming evening, 
and we must end it charmingly. there is some one at white's who wants 
immensely to know you-young lord poole, bournemouth's eldest son. 
he has already copied your neckties, and has begged me to introduce 
him to you. he is quite delightful and rather reminds me of you." 
"i hope not," said dorian with a sad look in his eyes. 
"but i am tired to-night, harry. i shan't go to the club. 
it is nearly eleven, and i want to go to bed early." 
"do stay. you have never played so well as to-night. there was something 
in your touch that was wonderful. it had more expression than i had ever 
heard from it before." 
"it is because i am going to be good," he answered, smiling. 
"i am a little changed already." 
"you cannot change to me, dorian," said lord henry. "you and i will always 
be friends." 
"yet you poisoned me with a book once. i should not forgive that. 
harry, promise me that you will never lend that book to any one. 
it does harm." 
"my dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize. you will 
soon be going about like the converted, and the revivalist, 
warning people against all the sins of which you have grown tired. 
you are much too delightful to do that. besides, it is no use. 
you and i are what we are, and will be what we will be. 
as for being poisoned by a book, there is no such thing as that. 
art has no influence upon action. it annihilates the desire 
to act. it is superbly sterile. the books that the world 
calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame. 
that is all. but we won't discuss literature. come round 
to-morrow. i am going to ride at eleven. we might go together, 
and i will take you to lunch afterwards with lady branksome. 
she is a charming woman, and wants to consult you about some 
tapestries she is thinking of buying. mind you come. or shall we 
lunch with our little duchess? she says she never sees you now. 
perhaps you are tired of gladys? i thought you would be. 
her clever tongue gets on one's nerves. well, in any case, be here at 
eleven." 
"must i really come, harry?" 
"certainly. the park is quite lovely now. i don't think there 
have been such lilacs since the year i met you." 
"very well. i shall be here at eleven," said dorian. 
"good night, harry." as he reached the door, he hesitated 
for a moment, as if he had something more to say. then he sighed 
and went out. 
chapter 20 
it was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and did 
not even put his silk scarf round his throat. as he strolled home, 
smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him. 
he heard one of them whisper to the other, "that is dorian gray." 
he remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, 
or stared at, or talked about. he was tired of hearing his own name now. 
half the charm of the little village where he had been so often lately 
was that no one knew who he was. he had often told the girl whom 
he had lured to love him that he was poor, and she had believed him. 
he had told her once that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him 
and answered that wicked people were always very old and very ugly. 
what a laugh she had!-just like a thrush singing. and how pretty she had 
been in her cotton dresses and her large hats! she knew nothing, but she had 
everything that he had lost. 
when he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him. 
he sent him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, 
and began to think over some of the things that lord henry had said 
to him. 
was it really true that one could never change? he felt 
a wild longing for the unstained purity of his boyhood- 
his rose-white boyhood, as lord henry had once called it. 
he knew that he had tarnished himself, filled his mind with 
corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he had been 
an evil influence to others, and had experienced a terrible joy 
in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, 
it had been the fairest and the most full of promise that 
he had brought to shame. but was it all irretrievable? 
was there no hope for him? 
ah! in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had 
prayed that the portrait should bear the burden of his days, 
and he keep the unsullied splendour of eternal youth! 
all his failure had been due to that. better for him that each sin 
of his life had brought its sure swift penalty along with it. 
there was purification in punishment. not "forgive us our sins" 
but "smite us for our iniquities" should be the prayer of man to a 
most just god. 
the curiously carved mirror that lord henry had given 
to him, so many years ago now, was standing on the table, 
and the white-limbed cupids laughed round it as of old. 
he took it up, as he had done on that night of horror 
when he had first noted the change in the fatal picture, 
and with wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished shield. 
once, some one who had terribly loved him had written 
to him a mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words: 
"the world is changed because you are made of ivory and gold. 
the curves of your lips rewrite history." the phrases came back 
to his memory, and he repeated them over and over to himself. 
then he loathed his own beauty, and flinging the mirror on 
the floor, crushed it into silver splinters beneath his heel. 
it was his beauty that had ruined him, his beauty and the youth 
that he had prayed for. but for those two things, his life 
might have been free from stain. his beauty had been to him 
but a mask, his youth but a mockery. what was youth at best? 
a green, an unripe time, a time of shallow moods, 
and sickly thoughts. why had he worn its livery? youth had 
spoiled him. 
it was better not to think of the past. nothing could alter that. 
it was of himself, and of his own future, that he had to think. 
james vane was hidden in a nameless grave in selby churchyard. 
alan campbell had shot himself one night in his laboratory, 
but had not revealed the secret that he had been forced to know. 
the excitement, such as it was, over basil hallward's 
disappearance would soon pass away. it was already waning. 
he was perfectly safe there. nor, indeed, was it the death 
of basil hallward that weighed most upon his mind. 
it was the living death of his own soul that troubled him. 
basil had painted the portrait that had marred his life. 
he could not forgive him that. it was the portrait that had 
done everything. basil had said things to him that were unbearable, 
and that he had yet borne with patience. the murder had 
been simply the madness of a moment. as for alan campbell, 
his suicide had been his own act. he had chosen to do it. 
it was nothing to him. 
a new life! that was what he wanted. that was what he was waiting for. 
surely he had begun it already. he had spared one innocent thing, 
at any rate. he would never again tempt innocence. he would be good. 
as he thought of hetty merton, he began to wonder if the portrait in the 
locked room had changed. surely it was not still so horrible as it had been? 
perhaps if his life became pure, he would be able to expel every sign of evil 
passion from the face. perhaps the signs of evil had already gone away. 
he would go and look. 
he took the lamp from the table and crept upstairs. as he unbarred the door, 
a smile of joy flitted across his strangely young-looking face and lingered 
for a moment about his lips. yes, he would be good, and the hideous thing 
that he had hidden away would no longer be a terror to him. he felt as if 
the load had been lifted from him already. 
he went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was 
his custom, and dragged the purple hanging from the portrait. 
a cry of pain and indignation broke from him. he could see 
no change, save that in the eyes there was a look of cunning 
and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of the hypocrite. 
the thing was still loathsome-more loathsome, if possible, 
than before-and the scarlet dew that spotted the hand 
seemed brighter, and more like blood newly spilled. 
then he trembled. had it been merely vanity that had made 
him do his one good deed? or the desire for a new sensation, 
as lord henry had hinted, with his mocking laugh? 
or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do 
things finer than we are ourselves? or, perhaps, all these? 
and why was the red stain larger than it had been? it seemed 
to have crept like a horrible disease over the wrinkled fingers. 
there was blood on the painted feet, as though the thing 
had dripped-blood even on the hand that had not held 
the knife. confess? did it mean that he was to confess? 
to give himself up and be put to death? he laughed. 
he felt that the idea was monstrous. besides, even if 
he did confess, who would believe him? there was no trace 
of the murdered man anywhere. everything belonging to him 
had been destroyed. he himself had burned what had been 
below-stairs. the world would simply say that he was mad. 
they would shut him up if he persisted in his story. 
. . . yet it was his duty to confess, to suffer public shame, 
and to make public atonement. there was a god who called 
upon men to tell their sins to earth as well as to heaven. 
nothing that he could do would cleanse him till he had 
told his own sin. his sin? he shrugged his shoulders. 
the death of basil hallward seemed very little to him. 
he was thinking of hetty merton. for it was an unjust mirror, 
this mirror of his soul that he was looking at. 
vanity? curiosity? hypocrisy? had there been nothing more 
in his renunciation than that? there had been something more. 
at least he thought so. but who could tell? . . . no. there 
had been nothing more. through vanity he had spared her. 
in hypocrisy he had worn the mask of goodness. for curiosity's 
sake he had tried the denial of self. he recognized that 
now. 
but this murder-was it to dog him all his life? was he always to be 
burdened by his past? was he really to confess? never. there was 
only one bit of evidence left against him. the picture itself- 
that was evidence. he would destroy it. why had he kept it so long? 
once it had given him pleasure to watch it changing and growing old. 
of late he had felt no such pleasure. it had kept him awake at night. 
when he had been away, he had been filled with terror lest other eyes 
should look upon it. it had brought melancholy across his passions. 
its mere memory had marred many moments of joy. it had been 
like conscience to him. yes, it had been conscience. he would 
destroy it. 
he looked round and saw the knife that had stabbed basil hallward. 
he had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain left upon it. 
it was bright, and glistened. as it had killed the painter, 
so it would kill the painter's work, and all that that meant. 
it would kill the past, and when that was dead, he would be free. 
it would kill this monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, 
he would be at peace. he seized the thing, and stabbed the picture 
with it. 
there was a cry heard, and a crash. the cry was so horrible 
in its agony that the frightened servants woke and crept 
out of their rooms. two gentlemen, who were passing in 
the square below, stopped and looked up at the great house. 
they walked on till they met a policeman and brought him back. 
the man rang the bell several times, but there was no answer. 
except for a light in one of the top windows, the house was all dark. 
after a time, he went away and stood in an adjoining portico 
and watched. 
"whose house is that, constable?" asked the elder of the two gentlemen. 
"mr. dorian gray's, sir," answered the policeman. 
they looked at each other, as they walked away, and sneered. 
one of them was sir henry ashton's uncle. 
inside, in the servants' part of the house, the half-clad 
domestics were talking in low whispers to each other. 
old mrs. leaf was crying and wringing her hands. francis was 
as pale as death. 
after about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one of the footmen 
and crept upstairs. they knocked, but there was no reply. they called out. 
everything was still. finally, after vainly trying to force the door, 
they got on the roof and dropped down on to the balcony. the windows 
yielded easily-their bolts were old. 
when they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid 
portrait of their master as they had last seen him, in all 
the wonder of his exquisite youth and beauty. lying on the floor 
was a dead man, in evening dress, with a knife in his heart. 
he was withered, wrinkled, and loathsome of visage. 
it was not till they had examined the rings that they 
recognized who it was. 
end of the project gutenberg etext of dorian gray 
the project gutenberg ebook of dracula, by bram stoker 
copyright laws are changing all over the world. be sure to check the 
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing 
this or any other project gutenberg ebook. 
this header should be the first thing seen when viewing this project 
gutenberg file. please do not remove it. do not change or edit the 
header without written permission. 
please read the "legal small print," and other information about the 
ebook and project gutenberg at the bottom of this file. included is 
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in 
how the file may be used. you can also find out about how to make a 
donation to project gutenberg, and how to get involved. 
**welcome to the world of free plain vanilla electronic texts** 
**ebooks readable by both humans and by computers, since 1971** 
*****these ebooks were prepared by thousands of volunteers!***** 
title: dracula 
author: bram stoker 
release date: october, 1995 [ebook #345] 
[most recently updated: august 18, 2006] 
edition: 13 
language: english 
character set encoding: us-ascii 
*** start of the project gutenberg ebook, dracula *** 
e-text revised by voltage spike 
dracula 
by 
bram stoker 
1897 edition 
chapter 1 
jonathan harker's journal 
3 may. bistritz.-left munich at 8:35 p.m., on 1st may, arriving at 
vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6:46, but train was 
an hour late. buda-pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse 
which i got of it from the train and the little i could walk through 
the streets. i feared to go very far from the station, as we had 
arrived late and would start as near the correct time as possible. 
the impression i had was that we were leaving the west and entering the 
east; the most western of splendid bridges over the danube, which is 
here of noble width and depth, took us among the traditions of turkish 
rule. 
we left in pretty good time, and came after nightfall to klausenburgh. 
here i stopped for the night at the hotel royale. i had for dinner, 
or rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which 
was very good but thirsty. (mem. get recipe for mina.) i asked the 
waiter, and he said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was 
a national dish, i should be able to get it anywhere along the 
carpathians. 
i found my smattering of german very useful here, indeed, i don't know 
how i should be able to get on without it. 
having had some time at my disposal when in london, i had visited the 
british museum, and made search among the books and maps in the 
library regarding transylvania; it had struck me that some 
foreknowledge of the country could hardly fail to have some importance 
in dealing with a nobleman of that country. 
i find that the district he named is in the extreme east of the 
country, just on the borders of three states, transylvania, moldavia, 
and bukovina, in the midst of the carpathian mountains; one of the 
wildest and least known portions of europe. 
i was not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality 
of the castle dracula, as there are no maps of this country as yet to 
compare with our own ordance survey maps; but i found that bistritz, 
the post town named by count dracula, is a fairly well-known place. i 
shall enter here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memory when 
i talk over my travels with mina. 
in the population of transylvania there are four distinct 
nationalities: saxons in the south, and mixed with them the wallachs, 
who are the descendants of the dacians; magyars in the west, and 
szekelys in the east and north. i am going among the latter, who 
claim to be descended from attila and the huns. this may be so, for 
when the magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they 
found the huns settled in it. 
i read that every known superstition in the world is gathered into the 
horseshoe of the carpathians, as if it were the centre of some sort of 
imaginative whirlpool; if so my stay may be very interesting. (mem., 
i must ask the count all about them.) 
i did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for i had 
all sorts of queer dreams. there was a dog howling all night under my 
window, which may have had something to do with it; or it may have 
been the paprika, for i had to drink up all the water in my carafe, 
and was still thirsty. towards morning i slept and was wakened by the 
continuous knocking at my door, so i guess i must have been sleeping 
soundly then. 
i had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of porridge of maize 
flour which they said was "mamaliga", and egg-plant stuffed with 
forcemeat, a very excellent dish, which they call "impletata". (mem., 
get recipe for this also.) 
i had to hurry breakfast, for the train started a little before eight, 
or rather it ought to have done so, for after rushing to the station 
at 7:30 i had to sit in the carriage for more than an hour before we 
began to move. 
it seems to me that the further east you go the more unpunctual are 
the trains. what ought they to be in china? 
all day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of 
beauty of every kind. sometimes we saw little towns or castles on the 
top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by 
rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each 
side of them to be subject to great floods. it takes a lot of water, 
and running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear. 
at every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in 
all sorts of attire. some of them were just like the peasants at home 
or those i saw coming through france and germany, with short jackets, 
and round hats, and home-made trousers; but others were very 
picturesque. 
the women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were 
very clumsy about the waist. they had all full white sleeves of some 
kind or other, and most of them had big belts with a lot of strips of 
something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of 
course there were petticoats under them. 
the strangest figures we saw were the slovaks, who were more barbarian 
than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white 
trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly 
a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. they wore high boots, 
with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and 
heavy black moustaches. they are very picturesque, but do not look 
prepossessing. on the stage they would be set down at once as some 
old oriental band of brigands. they are, however, i am told, very 
harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion. 
it was on the dark side of twilight when we got to bistritz, which is 
a very interesting old place. being practically on the frontier-for 
the borgo pass leads from it into bukovina-it has had a very stormy 
existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. fifty years ago a 
series of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five 
separate occasions. at the very beginning of the seventeenth century 
it underwent a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the 
casualties of war proper being assisted by famine and disease. 
count dracula had directed me to go to the golden krone hotel, which i 
found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of 
course i wanted to see all i could of the ways of the country. 
i was evidently expected, for when i got near the door i faced a 
cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress-white 
undergarment with a long double apron, front, and back, of coloured 
stuff fitting almost too tight for modesty. when i came close she 
bowed and said, "the herr englishman?" 
"yes," i said, "jonathan harker." 
she smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white 
shirtsleeves, who had followed her to the door. 
he went, but immediately returned with a letter: 
"my friend.-welcome to the carpathians. i am anxiously expecting 
you. sleep well tonight. at three tomorrow the diligence will 
start for bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. at the borgo 
pass my carriage will await you and will bring you to me. i trust 
that your journey from london has been a happy one, and that you 
will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land.-your friend, dracula." 
4 may-i found that my landlord had got a letter from the count, 
directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but on 
making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and 
pretended that he could not understand my german. 
this could not be true, because up to then he had understood it 
perfectly; at least, he answered my questions exactly as if he did. 
he and his wife, the old lady who had received me, looked at each 
other in a frightened sort of way. he mumbled out that the money had 
been sent in a letter, and that was all he knew. when i asked him if 
he knew count dracula, and could tell me anything of his castle, both 
he and his wife crossed themselves, and, saying that they knew nothing 
at all, simply refused to speak further. it was so near the time of 
starting that i had no time to ask anyone else, for it was all very 
mysterious and not by any means comforting. 
just before i was leaving, the old lady came up to my room and said in 
a hysterical way: "must you go? oh! young herr, must you go?" she 
was in such an excited state that she seemed to have lost her grip of 
what german she knew, and mixed it all up with some other language 
which i did not know at all. i was just able to follow her by asking 
many questions. when i told her that i must go at once, and that i 
was engaged on important business, she asked again: 
"do you know what day it is?" i answered that it was the fourth of 
may. she shook her head as she said again: 
"oh, yes! i know that! i know that, but do you know what day it is?" 
on my saying that i did not understand, she went on: 
"it is the eve of st. george's day. do you not know that tonight, 
when the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world will 
have full sway? do you know where you are going, and what you are 
going to?" she was in such evident distress that i tried to comfort 
her, but without effect. finally, she went down on her knees and 
implored me not to go; at least to wait a day or two before starting. 
it was all very ridiculous but i did not feel comfortable. however, 
there was business to be done, and i could allow nothing to interfere 
with it. 
i tried to raise her up, and said, as gravely as i could, that i 
thanked her, but my duty was imperative, and that i must go. 
she then rose and dried her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck 
offered it to me. 
i did not know what to do, for, as an english churchman, i have been 
taught to regard such things as in some measure idolatrous, and yet it 
seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in such 
a state of mind. 
she saw, i suppose, the doubt in my face, for she put the rosary round 
my neck and said, "for your mother's sake," and went out of the room. 
i am writing up this part of the diary whilst i am waiting for the 
coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still round my 
neck. 
whether it is the old lady's fear, or the many ghostly traditions of 
this place, or the crucifix itself, i do not know, but i am not 
feeling nearly as easy in my mind as usual. 
if this book should ever reach mina before i do, let it bring my 
goodbye. here comes the coach! 
5 may. the castle.-the gray of the morning has passed, and the sun 
is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with 
trees or hills i know not, for it is so far off that big things and 
little are mixed. 
i am not sleepy, and, as i am not to be called till i awake, naturally 
i write till sleep comes. 
there are many odd things to put down, and, lest who reads them may 
fancy that i dined too well before i left bistritz, let me put down my 
dinner exactly. 
i dined on what they called "robber steak"-bits of bacon, onion, and 
beef, seasoned with red pepper, and strung on sticks, and roasted over 
the fire, in simple style of the london cat's meat! 
the wine was golden mediasch, which produces a queer sting on the 
tongue, which is, however, not disagreeable. 
i had only a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else. 
when i got on the coach, the driver had not taken his seat, and i saw 
him talking to the landlady. 
they were evidently talking of me, for every now and then they looked 
at me, and some of the people who were sitting on the bench outside 
the door-came and listened, and then looked at me, most of them 
pityingly. i could hear a lot of words often repeated, queer words, 
for there were many nationalities in the crowd, so i quietly got my 
polyglot dictionary from my bag and looked them out. 
i must say they were not cheering to me, for amongst them were 
"ordog"-satan, "pokol"-hell, "stregoica"-witch, "vrolok" and 
"vlkoslak"-both mean the same thing, one being slovak and the other 
servian for something that is either werewolf or vampire. (mem., i 
must ask the count about these superstitions.) 
when we started, the crowd round the inn door, which had by this time 
swelled to a considerable size, all made the sign of the cross and 
pointed two fingers towards me. 
with some difficulty, i got a fellow passenger to tell me what they 
meant. he would not answer at first, but on learning that i was 
english, he explained that it was a charm or guard against the evil 
eye. 
this was not very pleasant for me, just starting for an unknown place 
to meet an unknown man. but everyone seemed so kind-hearted, and so 
sorrowful, and so sympathetic that i could not but be touched. 
i shall never forget the last glimpse which i had of the inn yard and 
its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing themselves, as they 
stood round the wide archway, with its background of rich foliage of 
oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in the centre of the 
yard. 
then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the whole front of 
the boxseat,-"gotza" they call them-cracked his big whip over his 
four small horses, which ran abreast, and we set off on our journey. 
i soon lost sight and recollection of ghostly fears in the beauty of 
the scene as we drove along, although had i known the language, or 
rather languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, i might 
not have been able to throw them off so easily. before us lay a green 
sloping land full of forests and woods, with here and there steep 
hills, crowned with clumps of trees or with farmhouses, the blank 
gable end to the road. there was everywhere a bewildering mass of 
fruit blossom-apple, plum, pear, cherry. and as we drove by i could 
see the green grass under the trees spangled with the fallen petals. 
in and out amongst these green hills of what they call here the 
"mittel land" ran the road, losing itself as it swept round the grassy 
curve, or was shut out by the straggling ends of pine woods, which 
here and there ran down the hillsides like tongues of flame. the road 
was rugged, but still we seemed to fly over it with a feverish haste. 
i could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver was 
evidently bent on losing no time in reaching borgo prund. i was told 
that this road is in summertime excellent, but that it had not yet 
been put in order after the winter snows. in this respect it is 
different from the general run of roads in the carpathians, for it is 
an old tradition that they are not to be kept in too good order. of 
old the hospadars would not repair them, lest the turk should think 
that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the 
war which was always really at loading point. 
beyond the green swelling hills of the mittel land rose mighty slopes 
of forest up to the lofty steeps of the carpathians themselves. right 
and left of us they towered, with the afternoon sun falling full upon 
them and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful 
range, deep blue and purple in the shadows of the peaks, green and 
brown where grass and rock mingled, and an endless perspective of 
jagged rock and pointed crags, till these were themselves lost in the 
distance, where the snowy peaks rose grandly. here and there seemed 
mighty rifts in the mountains, through which, as the sun began to 
sink, we saw now and again the white gleam of falling water. one of 
my companions touched my arm as we swept round the base of a hill and 
opened up the lofty, snow-covered peak of a mountain, which seemed, as 
we wound on our serpentine way, to be right before us. 
"look! isten szek!"-"god's seat!"-and he crossed himself reverently. 
as we wound on our endless way, and the sun sank lower and lower 
behind us, the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. this 
was emphasized by the fact that the snowy mountain-top still held the 
sunset, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink. here and 
there we passed cszeks and slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but i 
noticed that goitre was painfully prevalent. by the roadside were 
many crosses, and as we swept by, my companions all crossed 
themselves. here and there was a peasant man or woman kneeling before 
a shrine, who did not even turn round as we approached, but seemed in 
the self-surrender of devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the 
outer world. there were many things new to me. for instance, 
hay-ricks in the trees, and here and there very beautiful masses of 
weeping birch, their white stems shining like silver through the 
delicate green of the leaves. 
now and again we passed a leiter-wagon-the ordinary peasants's 
cart-with its long, snakelike vertebra, calculated to suit the 
inequalities of the road. on this were sure to be seated quite a 
group of homecoming peasants, the cszeks with their white, and the 
slovaks with their coloured sheepskins, the latter carrying 
lance-fashion their long staves, with axe at end. as the evening fell 
it began to get very cold, and the growing twilight seemed to merge 
into one dark mistiness the gloom of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, 
though in the valleys which ran deep between the spurs of the hills, 
as we ascended through the pass, the dark firs stood out here and 
there against the background of late-lying snow. sometimes, as the 
road was cut through the pine woods that seemed in the darkness to be 
closing down upon us, great masses of greyness which here and there 
bestrewed the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, 
which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered earlier in 
the evening, when the falling sunset threw into strange relief the 
ghost-like clouds which amongst the carpathians seem to wind 
ceaselessly through the valleys. sometimes the hills were so steep 
that, despite our driver's haste, the horses could only go slowly. i 
wished to get down and walk up them, as we do at home, but the driver 
would not hear of it. "no, no," he said. "you must not walk here. 
the dogs are too fierce." and then he added, with what he evidently 
meant for grim pleasantry-for he looked round to catch the approving 
smile of the rest-"and you may have enough of such matters before you 
go to sleep." the only stop he would make was a moment's pause to 
light his lamps. 
when it grew dark there seemed to be some excitement amongst the 
passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as 
though urging him to further speed. he lashed the horses unmercifully 
with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on 
to further exertions. then through the darkness i could see a sort of 
patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a cleft in the 
hills. the excitement of the passengers grew greater. the crazy 
coach rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat 
tossed on a stormy sea. i had to hold on. the road grew more level, 
and we appeared to fly along. then the mountains seemed to come 
nearer to us on each side and to frown down upon us. we were entering 
on the borgo pass. one by one several of the passengers offered me 
gifts, which they pressed upon me with an earnestness which would take 
no denial. these were certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each 
was given in simple good faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, 
and that same strange mixture of fear-meaning movements which i had 
seen outside the hotel at bistritz-the sign of the cross and the 
guard against the evil eye. then, as we flew along, the driver leaned 
forward, and on each side the passengers, craning over the edge of the 
coach, peered eagerly into the darkness. it was evident that 
something very exciting was either happening or expected, but though i 
asked each passenger, no one would give me the slightest explanation. 
this state of excitement kept on for some little time. and at last we 
saw before us the pass opening out on the eastern side. there were 
dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the air the heavy, oppressive 
sense of thunder. it seemed as though the mountain range had 
separated two atmospheres, and that now we had got into the thunderous 
one. i was now myself looking out for the conveyance which was to 
take me to the count. each moment i expected to see the glare of 
lamps through the blackness, but all was dark. the only light was the 
flickering rays of our own lamps, in which the steam from our 
hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud. we could see now the sandy 
road lying white before us, but there was on it no sign of a vehicle. 
the passengers drew back with a sigh of gladness, which seemed to mock 
my own disappointment. i was already thinking what i had best do, 
when the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something 
which i could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a 
tone, i thought it was "an hour less than the time." then turning to 
me, he spoke in german worse than my own. 
"there is no carriage here. the herr is not expected after all. he 
will now come on to bukovina, and return tomorrow or the next day, 
better the next day." whilst he was speaking the horses began to 
neigh and snort and plunge wildly, so that the driver had to hold them 
up. then, amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a 
universal crossing of themselves, a caleche, with four horses, drove 
up behind us, overtook us, and drew up beside the coach. i could see 
from the flash of our lamps as the rays fell on them, that the horses 
were coal-black and splendid animals. they were driven by a tall man, 
with a long brown beard and a great black hat, which seemed to hide 
his face from us. i could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright 
eyes, which seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned to us. 
he said to the driver, "you are early tonight, my friend." 
the man stammered in reply, "the english herr was in a hurry." 
to which the stranger replied, "that is why, i suppose, you wished him 
to go on to bukovina. you cannot deceive me, my friend. i know too 
much, and my horses are swift." 
as he spoke he smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, 
with very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory. one of 
my companions whispered to another the line from burger's "lenore". 
"denn die todten reiten schnell." ("for the dead travel fast.") 
the strange driver evidently heard the words, for he looked up with a 
gleaming smile. the passenger turned his face away, at the same time 
putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. "give me the herr's 
luggage," said the driver, and with exceeding alacrity my bags were 
handed out and put in the caleche. then i descended from the side of 
the coach, as the caleche was close alongside, the driver helping me 
with a hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel. his strength must 
have been prodigious. 
without a word he shook his reins, the horses turned, and we swept 
into the darkness of the pass. as i looked back i saw the steam from 
the horses of the coach by the light of the lamps, and projected 
against it the figures of my late companions crossing themselves. 
then the driver cracked his whip and called to his horses, and off 
they swept on their way to bukovina. as they sank into the darkness i 
felt a strange chill, and a lonely feeling come over me. but a cloak 
was thrown over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the 
driver said in excellent german-"the night is chill, mein herr, and 
my master the count bade me take all care of you. there is a flask of 
slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you 
should require it." 
i did not take any, but it was a comfort to know it was there all the 
same. i felt a little strangely, and not a little frightened. i 
think had there been any alternative i should have taken it, instead 
of prosecuting that unknown night journey. the carriage went at a 
hard pace straight along, then we made a complete turn and went along 
another straight road. it seemed to me that we were simply going over 
and over the same ground again, and so i took note of some salient 
point, and found that this was so. i would have liked to have asked 
the driver what this all meant, but i really feared to do so, for i 
thought that, placed as i was, any protest would have had no effect in 
case there had been an intention to delay. 
by-and-by, however, as i was curious to know how time was passing, i 
struck a match, and by its flame looked at my watch. it was within a 
few minutes of midnight. this gave me a sort of shock, for i suppose 
the general superstition about midnight was increased by my recent 
experiences. i waited with a sick feeling of suspense. 
then a dog began to howl somewhere in a farmhouse far down the road, a 
long, agonized wailing, as if from fear. the sound was taken up by 
another dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind 
which now sighed softly through the pass, a wild howling began, which 
seemed to come from all over the country, as far as the imagination 
could grasp it through the gloom of the night. 
at the first howl the horses began to strain and rear, but the driver 
spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and 
sweated as though after a runaway from sudden fright. then, far off 
in the distance, from the mountains on each side of us began a louder 
and a sharper howling, that of wolves, which affected both the horses 
and myself in the same way. for i was minded to jump from the caleche 
and run, whilst they reared again and plunged madly, so that the 
driver had to use all his great strength to keep them from bolting. 
in a few minutes, however, my own ears got accustomed to the sound, 
and the horses so far became quiet that the driver was able to descend 
and to stand before them. 
he petted and soothed them, and whispered something in their ears, as 
i have heard of horse-tamers doing, and with extraordinary effect, for 
under his caresses they became quite manageable again, though they 
still trembled. the driver again took his seat, and shaking his 
reins, started off at a great pace. this time, after going to the far 
side of the pass, he suddenly turned down a narrow roadway which ran 
sharply to the right. 
soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over 
the roadway till we passed as through a tunnel. and again great 
frowning rocks guarded us boldly on either side. though we were in 
shelter, we could hear the rising wind, for it moaned and whistled 
through the rocks, and the branches of the trees crashed together as 
we swept along. it grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery 
snow began to fall, so that soon we and all around us were covered 
with a white blanket. the keen wind still carried the howling of the 
dogs, though this grew fainter as we went on our way. the baying of 
the wolves sounded nearer and nearer, as though they were closing 
round on us from every side. i grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses 
shared my fear. the driver, however, was not in the least disturbed. 
he kept turning his head to left and right, but i could not see 
anything through the darkness. 
suddenly, away on our left i saw a faint flickering blue flame. the 
driver saw it at the same moment. he at once checked the horses, and, 
jumping to the ground, disappeared into the darkness. i did not know 
what to do, the less as the howling of the wolves grew closer. but 
while i wondered, the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a 
word took his seat, and we resumed our journey. i think i must have 
fallen asleep and kept dreaming of the incident, for it seemed to be 
repeated endlessly, and now looking back, it is like a sort of awful 
nightmare. once the flame appeared so near the road, that even in the 
darkness around us i could watch the driver's motions. he went 
rapidly to where the blue flame arose, it must have been very faint, 
for it did not seem to illumine the place around it at all, and 
gathering a few stones, formed them into some device. 
once there appeared a strange optical effect. when he stood between 
me and the flame he did not obstruct it, for i could see its ghostly 
flicker all the same. this startled me, but as the effect was only 
momentary, i took it that my eyes deceived me straining through the 
darkness. then for a time there were no blue flames, and we sped 
onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the wolves around us, 
as though they were following in a moving circle. 
at last there came a time when the driver went further afield than he 
had yet gone, and during his absence, the horses began to tremble 
worse than ever and to snort and scream with fright. i could not see 
any cause for it, for the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether. 
but just then the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared 
behind the jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its 
light i saw around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling 
red tongues, with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. they were a 
hundred times more terrible in the grim silence which held them than 
even when they howled. for myself, i felt a sort of paralysis of 
fear. it is only when a man feels himself face to face with such 
horrors that he can understand their true import. 
all at once the wolves began to howl as though the moonlight had had 
some peculiar effect on them. the horses jumped about and reared, and 
looked helplessly round with eyes that rolled in a way painful to 
see. but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side, 
and they had perforce to remain within it. i called to the coachman 
to come, for it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break 
out through the ring and to aid his approach, i shouted and beat the 
side of the caleche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from the 
side, so as to give him a chance of reaching the trap. how he came 
there, i know not, but i heard his voice raised in a tone of imperious 
command, and looking towards the sound, saw him stand in the roadway. 
as he swept his long arms, as though brushing aside some impalpable 
obstacle, the wolves fell back and back further still. just then a 
heavy cloud passed across the face of the moon, so that we were again 
in darkness. 
when i could see again the driver was climbing into the caleche, and 
the wolves disappeared. this was all so strange and uncanny that a 
dreadful fear came upon me, and i was afraid to speak or move. the 
time seemed interminable as we swept on our way, now in almost 
complete darkness, for the rolling clouds obscured the moon. 
we kept on ascending, with occasional periods of quick descent, but in 
the main always ascending. suddenly, i became conscious of the fact 
that the driver was in the act of pulling up the horses in the 
courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came 
no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line 
against the sky. 
chapter 2 
jonathan harker's journal continued 
5 may.-i must have been asleep, for certainly if i had been fully 
awake i must have noticed the approach of such a remarkable place. in 
the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several 
dark ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed 
bigger than it really is. i have not yet been able to see it by 
daylight. 
when the caleche stopped, the driver jumped down and held out his hand 
to assist me to alight. again i could not but notice his prodigious 
strength. his hand actually seemed like a steel vice that could have 
crushed mine if he had chosen. then he took my traps, and placed them 
on the ground beside me as i stood close to a great door, old and 
studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of 
massive stone. i could see even in the dim light that the stone was 
massively carved, but that the carving had been much worn by time and 
weather. as i stood, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook 
the reins. the horses started forward, and trap and all disappeared 
down one of the dark openings. 
i stood in silence where i was, for i did not know what to do. of 
bell or knocker there was no sign. through these frowning walls and 
dark window openings it was not likely that my voice could penetrate. 
the time i waited seemed endless, and i felt doubts and fears crowding 
upon me. what sort of place had i come to, and among what kind of 
people? what sort of grim adventure was it on which i had embarked? 
was this a customary incident in the life of a solicitor's clerk sent 
out to explain the purchase of a london estate to a foreigner? 
solicitor's clerk! mina would not like that. solicitor, for just 
before leaving london i got word that my examination was successful, 
and i am now a full-blown solicitor! i began to rub my eyes and pinch 
myself to see if i were awake. it all seemed like a horrible 
nightmare to me, and i expected that i should suddenly awake, and find 
myself at home, with the dawn struggling in through the windows, as i 
had now and again felt in the morning after a day of overwork. but my 
flesh answered the pinching test, and my eyes were not to be 
deceived. i was indeed awake and among the carpathians. all i could 
do now was to be patient, and to wait the coming of morning. 
just as i had come to this conclusion i heard a heavy step approaching 
behind the great door, and saw through the chinks the gleam of a 
coming light. then there was the sound of rattling chains and the 
clanking of massive bolts drawn back. a key was turned with the loud 
grating noise of long disuse, and the great door swung back. 
within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a long white 
moustache, and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck 
of colour about him anywhere. he held in his hand an antique silver 
lamp, in which the flame burned without a chimney or globe of any 
kind, throwing long quivering shadows as it flickered in the draught 
of the open door. the old man motioned me in with his right hand with 
a courtly gesture, saying in excellent english, but with a strange 
intonation. 
"welcome to my house! enter freely and of your own free will!" he 
made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as 
though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. the instant, 
however, that i had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively 
forward, and holding out his hand grasped mine with a strength which 
made me wince, an effect which was not lessened by the fact that it 
seemed cold as ice, more like the hand of a dead than a living man. 
again he said, 
"welcome to my house! enter freely. go safely, and leave something 
of the happiness you bring!" the strength of the handshake was so 
much akin to that which i had noticed in the driver, whose face i had 
not seen, that for a moment i doubted if it were not the same person 
to whom i was speaking. so to make sure, i said interrogatively, 
"count dracula?" 
he bowed in a courtly way as he replied, "i am dracula, and i bid you 
welcome, mr. harker, to my house. come in, the night air is chill, 
and you must need to eat and rest." as he was speaking, he put the lamp 
on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out, took my luggage. he had 
carried it in before i could forestall him. i protested, but he 
insisted. 
"nay, sir, you are my guest. it is late, and my people are not 
available. let me see to your comfort myself." he insisted on carrying 
my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and 
along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang 
heavily. at the end of this he threw open a heavy door, and i 
rejoiced to see within a well-lit room in which a table was spread for 
supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly 
replenished, flamed and flared. 
the count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and crossing 
the room, opened another door, which led into a small octagonal room 
lit by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. 
passing through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to 
enter. it was a welcome sight. for here was a great bedroom well 
lighted and warmed with another log fire, also added to but lately, 
for the top logs were fresh, which sent a hollow roar up the wide 
chimney. the count himself left my luggage inside and withdrew, 
saying, before he closed the door. 
"you will need, after your journey, to refresh yourself by making your 
toilet. i trust you will find all you wish. when you are ready, come 
into the other room, where you will find your supper prepared." 
the light and warmth and the count's courteous welcome seemed to have 
dissipated all my doubts and fears. having then reached my normal 
state, i discovered that i was half famished with hunger. so making a 
hasty toilet, i went into the other room. 
i found supper already laid out. my host, who stood on one side of 
the great fireplace, leaning against the stonework, made a graceful 
wave of his hand to the table, and said, 
"i pray you, be seated and sup how you please. you will i trust, 
excuse me that i do not join you, but i have dined already, and i do 
not sup." 
i handed to him the sealed letter which mr. hawkins had entrusted to 
me. he opened it and read it gravely. then, with a charming smile, 
he handed it to me to read. one passage of it, at least, gave me a 
thrill of pleasure. 
"i must regret that an attack of gout, from which malady i am a 
constant sufferer, forbids absolutely any travelling on my part for 
some time to come. but i am happy to say i can send a sufficient 
substitute, one in whom i have every possible confidence. he is a 
young man, full of energy and talent in his own way, and of a very 
faithful disposition. he is discreet and silent, and has grown into 
manhood in my service. he shall be ready to attend on you when you 
will during his stay, and shall take your instructions in all 
matters." 
the count himself came forward and took off the cover of a dish, and i 
fell to at once on an excellent roast chicken. this, with some cheese 
and a salad and a bottle of old tokay, of which i had two glasses, was 
my supper. during the time i was eating it the count asked me many 
questions as to my journey, and i told him by degrees all i had 
experienced. 
by this time i had finished my supper, and by my host's desire had 
drawn up a chair by the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he 
offered me, at the same time excusing himself that he did not smoke. 
i had now an opportunity of observing him, and found him of a very 
marked physiognomy. 
his face was a strong, a very strong, aquiline, with high bridge of 
the thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils, with lofty domed 
forehead, and hair growing scantily round the temples but profusely 
elsewhere. his eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the 
nose, and with bushy hair that seemed to curl in its own profusion. 
the mouth, so far as i could see it under the heavy moustache, was 
fixed and rather cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth. 
these protruded over the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed 
astonishing vitality in a man of his years. for the rest, his ears 
were pale, and at the tops extremely pointed. the chin was broad and 
strong, and the cheeks firm though thin. the general effect was one 
of extraordinary pallor. 
hitherto i had noticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees 
in the firelight, and they had seemed rather white and fine. but 
seeing them now close to me, i could not but notice that they were 
rather coarse, broad, with squat fingers. strange to say, there were 
hairs in the centre of the palm. the nails were long and fine, and 
cut to a sharp point. as the count leaned over me and his hands 
touched me, i could not repress a shudder. it may have been that his 
breath was rank, but a horrible feeling of nausea came over me, which, 
do what i would, i could not conceal. 
the count, evidently noticing it, drew back. and with a grim sort of 
smile, which showed more than he had yet done his protruberant teeth, 
sat himself down again on his own side of the fireplace. we were both 
silent for a while, and as i looked towards the window i saw the first 
dim streak of the coming dawn. there seemed a strange stillness over 
everything. but as i listened, i heard as if from down below in the 
valley the howling of many wolves. the count's eyes gleamed, and he 
said. 
"listen to them, the children of the night. what music they make!" 
seeing, i suppose, some expression in my face strange to him, he 
added, "ah, sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the 
feelings of the hunter." then he rose and said. 
"but you must be tired. your bedroom is all ready, and tomorrow you 
shall sleep as late as you will. i have to be away till the 
afternoon, so sleep well and dream well!" with a courteous bow, he 
opened for me himself the door to the octagonal room, and i entered my 
bedroom. 
i am all in a sea of wonders. i doubt. i fear. i think strange 
things, which i dare not confess to my own soul. god keep me, if only 
for the sake of those dear to me! 
7 may.-it is again early morning, but i have rested and enjoyed the 
last twenty-four hours. i slept till late in the day, and awoke of my 
own accord. when i had dressed myself i went into the room where we 
had supped, and found a cold breakfast laid out, with coffee kept hot 
by the pot being placed on the hearth. there was a card on the table, 
on which was written-"i have to be absent for a while. do not wait 
for me. d." i set to and enjoyed a hearty meal. when i had done, i 
looked for a bell, so that i might let the servants know i had 
finished, but i could not find one. there are certainly odd 
deficiencies in the house, considering the extraordinary evidences of 
wealth which are round me. the table service is of gold, and so 
beautifully wrought that it must be of immense value. the curtains 
and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed are 
of the costliest and most beautiful fabrics, and must have been of 
fabulous value when they were made, for they are centuries old, though 
in excellent order. i saw something like them in hampton court, but 
they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. but still in none of the 
rooms is there a mirror. there is not even a toilet glass on my 
table, and i had to get the little shaving glass from my bag before i 
could either shave or brush my hair. i have not yet seen a servant 
anywhere, or heard a sound near the castle except the howling of 
wolves. some time after i had finished my meal, i do not know whether 
to call it breakfast or dinner, for it was between five and six 
o'clock when i had it, i looked about for something to read, for i did 
not like to go about the castle until i had asked the count's 
permission. there was absolutely nothing in the room, book, 
newspaper, or even writing materials, so i opened another door in the 
room and found a sort of library. the door opposite mine i tried, but 
found locked. 
in the library i found, to my great delight, a vast number of english 
books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and 
newspapers. a table in the centre was littered with english magazines 
and newspapers, though none of them were of very recent date. the 
books were of the most varied kind, history, geography, politics, 
political economy, botany, geology, law, all relating to england and 
english life and customs and manners. there were even such books of 
reference as the london directory, the "red" and "blue" books, 
whitaker's almanac, the army and navy lists, and it somehow gladdened 
my heart to see it, the law list. 
whilst i was looking at the books, the door opened, and the count 
entered. he saluted me in a hearty way, and hoped that i had had a 
good night's rest. then he went on. 
"i am glad you found your way in here, for i am sure there is much 
that will interest you. these companions," and he laid his hand on 
some of the books, "have been good friends to me, and for some years 
past, ever since i had the idea of going to london, have given me 
many, many hours of pleasure. through them i have come to know your 
great england, and to know her is to love her. i long to go through 
the crowded streets of your mighty london, to be in the midst of the 
whirl and rush of humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, 
and all that makes it what it is. but alas! as yet i only know your 
tongue through books. to you, my friend, i look that i know it to 
speak." 
"but, count," i said, "you know and speak english thoroughly!" he 
bowed gravely. 
"i thank you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet 
i fear that i am but a little way on the road i would travel. true, i 
know the grammar and the words, but yet i know not how to speak them." 
"indeed," i said, "you speak excellently." 
"not so," he answered. "well, i know that, did i move and speak in 
your london, none there are who would not know me for a stranger. that 
is not enough for me. here i am noble. i am a boyar. the common 
people know me, and i am master. but a stranger in a strange land, he 
is no one. men know him not, and to know not is to care not for. i 
am content if i am like the rest, so that no man stops if he sees me, 
or pauses in his speaking if he hears my words, 'ha, ha! a stranger!' 
i have been so long master that i would be master still, or at least 
that none other should be master of me. you come to me not alone as 
agent of my friend peter hawkins, of exeter, to tell me all about my 
new estate in london. you shall, i trust, rest here with me a while, 
so that by our talking i may learn the english intonation. and i 
would that you tell me when i make error, even of the smallest, in my 
speaking. i am sorry that i had to be away so long today, but you 
will, i know forgive one who has so many important affairs in hand." 
of course i said all i could about being willing, and asked if i might 
come into that room when i chose. he answered, "yes, certainly," and 
added. 
"you may go anywhere you wish in the castle, except where the doors 
are locked, where of course you will not wish to go. there is reason 
that all things are as they are, and did you see with my eyes and know 
with my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand." i said i was 
sure of this, and then he went on. 
"we are in transylvania, and transylvania is not england. our ways 
are not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things. nay, 
from what you have told me of your experiences already, you know 
something of what strange things there may be." 
this led to much conversation, and as it was evident that he wanted to 
talk, if only for talking's sake, i asked him many questions regarding 
things that had already happened to me or come within my notice. 
sometimes he sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation by 
pretending not to understand, but generally he answered all i asked 
most frankly. then as time went on, and i had got somewhat bolder, i 
asked him of some of the strange things of the preceding night, as for 
instance, why the coachman went to the places where he had seen the 
blue flames. he then explained to me that it was commonly believed 
that on a certain night of the year, last night, in fact, when all 
evil spirits are supposed to have unchecked sway, a blue flame is seen 
over any place where treasure has been concealed. 
"that treasure has been hidden," he went on, "in the region through 
which you came last night, there can be but little doubt. for it was 
the ground fought over for centuries by the wallachian, the saxon, and 
the turk. why, there is hardly a foot of soil in all this region that 
has not been enriched by the blood of men, patriots or invaders. in 
the old days there were stirring times, when the austrian and the 
hungarian came up in hordes, and the patriots went out to meet them, 
men and women, the aged and the children too, and waited their coming 
on the rocks above the passes, that they might sweep destruction on 
them with their artificial avalanches. when the invader was 
triumphant he found but little, for whatever there was had been 
sheltered in the friendly soil." 
"but how," said i, "can it have remained so long undiscovered, when 
there is a sure index to it if men will but take the trouble to look?" 
the count smiled, and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long, 
sharp, canine teeth showed out strangely. he answered: 
"because your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool! those flames 
only appear on one night, and on that night no man of this land will, 
if he can help it, stir without his doors. and, dear sir, even if he 
did he would not know what to do. why, even the peasant that you tell 
me of who marked the place of the flame would not know where to look 
in daylight even for his own work. even you would not, i dare be 
sworn, be able to find these places again?" 
"there you are right," i said. "i know no more than the dead where 
even to look for them." then we drifted into other matters. 
"come," he said at last, "tell me of london and of the house which you 
have procured for me." with an apology for my remissness, i went into 
my own room to get the papers from my bag. whilst i was placing them 
in order i heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room, and 
as i passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the 
lamp lit, for it was by this time deep into the dark. the lamps were 
also lit in the study or library, and i found the count lying on the 
sofa, reading, of all things in the world, an english bradshaw's 
guide. when i came in he cleared the books and papers from the table, 
and with him i went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts. he 
was interested in everything, and asked me a myriad questions about 
the place and its surroundings. he clearly had studied beforehand all 
he could get on the subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at 
the end knew very much more than i did. when i remarked this, he 
answered. 
"well, but, my friend, is it not needful that i should? when i go 
there i shall be all alone, and my friend harker jonathan, nay, pardon 
me. i fall into my country's habit of putting your patronymic first, 
my friend jonathan harker will not be by my side to correct and aid 
me. he will be in exeter, miles away, probably working at papers of 
the law with my other friend, peter hawkins. so!" 
we went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the estate at 
purfleet. when i had told him the facts and got his signature to the 
necessary papers, and had written a letter with them ready to post to 
mr. hawkins, he began to ask me how i had come across so suitable a 
place. i read to him the notes which i had made at the time, and 
which i inscribe here. 
"at purfleet, on a byroad, i came across just such a place as seemed 
to be required, and where was displayed a dilapidated notice that the 
place was for sale. it was surrounded by a high wall, of ancient 
structure, built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a 
large number of years. the closed gates are of heavy old oak and 
iron, all eaten with rust. 
"the estate is called carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old quatre 
face, as the house is four sided, agreeing with the cardinal points of 
the compass. it contains in all some twenty acres, quite surrounded 
by the solid stone wall above mentioned. there are many trees on it, 
which make it in places gloomy, and there is a deep, dark-looking pond 
or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear 
and flows away in a fair-sized stream. the house is very large and of 
all periods back, i should say, to mediaeval times, for one part is of 
stone immensely thick, with only a few windows high up and heavily 
barred with iron. it looks like part of a keep, and is close to an 
old chapel or church. i could not enter it, as i had not the key of 
the door leading to it from the house, but i have taken with my kodak 
views of it from various points. the house had been added to, but in 
a very straggling way, and i can only guess at the amount of ground it 
covers, which must be very great. there are but few houses close at 
hand, one being a very large house only recently added to and formed 
into a private lunatic asylum. it is not, however, visible from the 
grounds." 
when i had finished, he said, "i am glad that it is old and big. i 
myself am of an old family, and to live in a new house would kill me. 
a house cannot be made habitable in a day, and after all, how few days 
go to make up a century. i rejoice also that there is a chapel of old 
times. we transylvanian nobles love not to think that our bones may 
lie amongst the common dead. i seek not gaiety nor mirth, not the 
bright voluptuousness of much sunshine and sparkling waters which 
please the young and gay. i am no longer young, and my heart, through 
weary years of mourning over the dead, is not attuned to mirth. moreover, 
the walls of my castle are broken. the shadows are many, and the wind 
breathes cold through the broken battlements and casements. i love 
the shade and the shadow, and would be alone with my thoughts when i 
may." somehow his words and his look did not seem to accord, or else 
it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and 
saturnine. 
presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to pull my papers 
together. he was some little time away, and i began to look at some 
of the books around me. one was an atlas, which i found opened 
naturally to england, as if that map had been much used. on looking 
at it i found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining 
these i noticed that one was near london on the east side, manifestly 
where his new estate was situated. the other two were exeter, and 
whitby on the yorkshire coast. 
it was the better part of an hour when the count returned. "aha!" he 
said. "still at your books? good! but you must not work always. 
come! i am informed that your supper is ready." he took my arm, and 
we went into the next room, where i found an excellent supper ready on 
the table. the count again excused himself, as he had dined out on 
his being away from home. but he sat as on the previous night, and 
chatted whilst i ate. after supper i smoked, as on the last evening, 
and the count stayed with me, chatting and asking questions on every 
conceivable subject, hour after hour. i felt that it was getting very 
late indeed, but i did not say anything, for i felt under obligation 
to meet my host's wishes in every way. i was not sleepy, as the long 
sleep yesterday had fortified me, but i could not help experiencing 
that chill which comes over one at the coming of the dawn, which is 
like, in its way, the turn of the tide. they say that people who are 
near death die generally at the change to dawn or at the turn of the 
tide. anyone who has when tired, and tied as it were to his post, 
experienced this change in the atmosphere can well believe it. all at 
once we heard the crow of the cock coming up with preternatural 
shrillness through the clear morning air. 
count dracula, jumping to his feet, said, "why there is the morning 
again! how remiss i am to let you stay up so long. you must make 
your conversation regarding my dear new country of england less 
interesting, so that i may not forget how time flies by us," and with 
a courtly bow, he quickly left me. 
i went into my room and drew the curtains, but there was little to 
notice. my window opened into the courtyard, all i could see was the 
warm grey of quickening sky. so i pulled the curtains again, and have 
written of this day. 
8 may.-i began to fear as i wrote in this book that i was getting too 
diffuse. but now i am glad that i went into detail from the first, 
for there is something so strange about this place and all in it that 
i cannot but feel uneasy. i wish i were safe out of it, or that i had 
never come. it may be that this strange night existence is telling on 
me, but would that that were all! if there were any one to talk to i 
could bear it, but there is no one. i have only the count to speak 
with, and he-i fear i am myself the only living soul within the 
place. let me be prosaic so far as facts can be. it will help me to 
bear up, and imagination must not run riot with me. if it does i am 
lost. let me say at once how i stand, or seem to. 
i only slept a few hours when i went to bed, and feeling that i could 
not sleep any more, got up. i had hung my shaving glass by the 
window, and was just beginning to shave. suddenly i felt a hand on my 
shoulder, and heard the count's voice saying to me, "good morning." i 
started, for it amazed me that i had not seen him, since the 
reflection of the glass covered the whole room behind me. in starting 
i had cut myself slightly, but did not notice it at the moment. having 
answered the count's salutation, i turned to the glass again to see 
how i had been mistaken. this time there could be no error, for the 
man was close to me, and i could see him over my shoulder. but there 
was no reflection of him in the mirror! the whole room behind me was 
displayed, but there was no sign of a man in it, except myself. 
this was startling, and coming on the top of so many strange things, 
was beginning to increase that vague feeling of uneasiness which i 
always have when the count is near. but at the instant i saw that the 
cut had bled a little, and the blood was trickling over my chin. i 
laid down the razor, turning as i did so half round to look for some 
sticking plaster. when the count saw my face, his eyes blazed with a 
sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly made a grab at my throat. i 
drew away and his hand touched the string of beads which held the 
crucifix. it made an instant change in him, for the fury passed so 
quickly that i could hardly believe that it was ever there. 
"take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. it is more 
dangerous that you think in this country." then seizing the shaving 
glass, he went on, "and this is the wretched thing that has done the 
mischief. it is a foul bauble of man's vanity. away with it!" and 
opening the window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung out 
the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones of 
the courtyard far below. then he withdrew without a word. it is very 
annoying, for i do not see how i am to shave, unless in my watch-case 
or the bottom of the shaving pot, which is fortunately of metal. 
when i went into the dining room, breakfast was prepared, but i could 
not find the count anywhere. so i breakfasted alone. it is strange 
that as yet i have not seen the count eat or drink. he must be a very 
peculiar man! after breakfast i did a little exploring in the 
castle. i went out on the stairs, and found a room looking towards 
the south. 
the view was magnificent, and from where i stood there was every 
opportunity of seeing it. the castle is on the very edge of a 
terrific precipice. a stone falling from the window would fall a 
thousand feet without touching anything! as far as the eye can reach 
is a sea of green tree tops, with occasionally a deep rift where there 
is a chasm. here and there are silver threads where the rivers wind 
in deep gorges through the forests. 
but i am not in heart to describe beauty, for when i had seen the view 
i explored further. doors, doors, doors everywhere, and all locked 
and bolted. in no place save from the windows in the castle walls is 
there an available exit. the castle is a veritable prison, and i am a 
prisoner! 
chapter 3 
jonathan harker's journal continued 
when i found that i was a prisoner a sort of wild feeling came over 
me. i rushed up and down the stairs, trying every door and peering 
out of every window i could find, but after a little the conviction of 
my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. when i look back 
after a few hours i think i must have been mad for the time, for i 
behaved much as a rat does in a trap. when, however, the conviction 
had come to me that i was helpless i sat down quietly, as quietly as i 
have ever done anything in my life, and began to think over what was 
best to be done. i am thinking still, and as yet have come to no 
definite conclusion. of one thing only am i certain. that it is no 
use making my ideas known to the count. he knows well that i am 
imprisoned, and as he has done it himself, and has doubtless his own 
motives for it, he would only deceive me if i trusted him fully with 
the facts. so far as i can see, my only plan will be to keep my 
knowledge and my fears to myself, and my eyes open. i am, i know, 
either being deceived, like a baby, by my own fears, or else i am in 
desperate straits, and if the latter be so, i need, and shall need, 
all my brains to get through. 
i had hardly come to this conclusion when i heard the great door below 
shut, and knew that the count had returned. he did not come at once 
into the library, so i went cautiously to my own room and found him 
making the bed. this was odd, but only confirmed what i had all along 
thought, that there are no servants in the house. when later i saw 
him through the chink of the hinges of the door laying the table in 
the dining room, i was assured of it. for if he does himself all 
these menial offices, surely it is proof that there is no one else in 
the castle, it must have been the count himself who was the driver of 
the coach that brought me here. this is a terrible thought, for if 
so, what does it mean that he could control the wolves, as he did, by 
only holding up his hand for silence? how was it that all the people 
at bistritz and on the coach had some terrible fear for me? what 
meant the giving of the crucifix, of the garlic, of the wild rose, of 
the mountain ash? 
bless that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for 
it is a comfort and a strength to me whenever i touch it. it is odd 
that a thing which i have been taught to regard with disfavour and as 
idolatrous should in a time of loneliness and trouble be of help. is 
it that there is something in the essence of the thing itself, or that 
it is a medium, a tangible help, in conveying memories of sympathy and 
comfort? some time, if it may be, i must examine this matter and try 
to make up my mind about it. in the meantime i must find out all i 
can about count dracula, as it may help me to understand. tonight he 
may talk of himself, if i turn the conversation that way. i must be 
very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion. 
midnight.-i have had a long talk with the count. i asked him a few 
questions on transylvania history, and he warmed up to the subject 
wonderfully. in his speaking of things and people, and especially of 
battles, he spoke as if he had been present at them all. this he 
afterwards explained by saying that to a boyar the pride of his house 
and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their 
fate is his fate. whenever he spoke of his house he always said "we", 
and spoke almost in the plural, like a king speaking. i wish i could 
put down all he said exactly as he said it, for to me it was most 
fascinating. it seemed to have in it a whole history of the country. 
he grew excited as he spoke, and walked about the room pulling his 
great white moustache and grasping anything on which he laid his hands 
as though he would crush it by main strength. one thing he said which 
i shall put down as nearly as i can, for it tells in its way the story 
of his race. 
"we szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the 
blood of many brave races who fought as the lion fights, for lordship. 
here, in the whirlpool of european races, the ugric tribe bore down 
from iceland the fighting spirit which thor and wodin gave them, which 
their berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of 
europe, aye, and of asia and africa too, till the peoples thought that 
the werewolves themselves had come. here, too, when they came, they 
found the huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living 
flame, till the dying peoples held that in their veins ran the blood 
of those old witches, who, expelled from scythia had mated with the 
devils in the desert. fools, fools! what devil or what witch was 
ever so great as attila, whose blood is in these veins?" he held up 
his arms. "is it a wonder that we were a conquering race, that we 
were proud, that when the magyar, the lombard, the avar, the bulgar, 
or the turk poured his thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? 
is it strange that when arpad and his legions swept through the 
hungarian fatherland he found us here when he reached the frontier, 
that the honfoglalas was completed there? and when the hungarian 
flood swept eastward, the szekelys were claimed as kindred by the 
victorious magyars, and to us for centuries was trusted the guarding 
of the frontier of turkeyland. aye, and more than that, endless duty 
of the frontier guard, for as the turks say, 'water sleeps, and the 
enemy is sleepless.' who more gladly than we throughout the four 
nations received the 'bloody sword,' or at its warlike call flocked 
quicker to the standard of the king? when was redeemed that great 
shame of my nation, the shame of cassova, when the flags of the 
wallach and the magyar went down beneath the crescent? who was it but 
one of my own race who as voivode crossed the danube and beat the turk 
on his own ground? this was a dracula indeed! woe was it that his 
own unworthy brother, when he had fallen, sold his people to the turk 
and brought the shame of slavery on them! was it not this dracula, 
indeed, who inspired that other of his race who in a later age again 
and again brought his forces over the great river into turkeyland, 
who, when he was beaten back, came again, and again, though he had to 
come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being 
slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph! 
they said that he thought only of himself. bah! what good are 
peasants without a leader? where ends the war without a brain and 
heart to conduct it? again, when, after the battle of mohacs, we 
threw off the hungarian yoke, we of the dracula blood were amongst 
their leaders, for our spirit would not brook that we were not free. 
ah, young sir, the szekelys, and the dracula as their heart's blood, 
their brains, and their swords, can boast a record that mushroom 
growths like the hapsburgs and the romanoffs can never reach. the 
warlike days are over. blood is too precious a thing in these days of 
dishonourable peace, and the glories of the great races are as a tale 
that is told." 
it was by this time close on morning, and we went to bed. (mem., this 
diary seems horribly like the beginning of the "arabian nights," for 
everything has to break off at cockcrow, or like the ghost of hamlet's 
father.) 
12 may.-let me begin with facts, bare, meager facts, verified by 
books and figures, and of which there can be no doubt. i must not 
confuse them with experiences which will have to rest on my own 
observation, or my memory of them. last evening when the count came 
from his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on 
the doing of certain kinds of business. i had spent the day wearily 
over books, and, simply to keep my mind occupied, went over some of 
the matters i had been examined in at lincoln's inn. there was a 
certain method in the count's inquiries, so i shall try to put them 
down in sequence. the knowledge may somehow or some time be useful to 
me. 
first, he asked if a man in england might have two solicitors or more. 
i told him he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not 
be wise to have more than one solicitor engaged in one transaction, as 
only one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to 
militate against his interest. he seemed thoroughly to understand, 
and went on to ask if there would be any practical difficulty in having 
one man to attend, say, to banking, and another to look after 
shipping, in case local help were needed in a place far from the home 
of the banking solicitor. i asked to explain more fully, so that i 
might not by any chance mislead him, so he said, 
"i shall illustrate. your friend and mine, mr. peter hawkins, from 
under the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at exeter, which is far 
from london, buys for me through your good self my place at london. 
good! now here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strange 
that i have sought the services of one so far off from london instead 
of some one resident there, that my motive was that no local interest 
might be served save my wish only, and as one of london residence 
might, perhaps, have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, i 
went thus afield to seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my 
interest. now, suppose i, who have much of affairs, wish to ship 
goods, say, to newcastle, or durham, or harwich, or dover, might it 
not be that it could with more ease be done by consigning to one in 
these ports?" 
i answered that certainly it would be most easy, but that we 
solicitors had a system of agency one for the other, so that local 
work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that 
the client, simply placing himself in the hands of one man, could have 
his wishes carried out by him without further trouble. 
"but," said he, "i could be at liberty to direct myself. is it not 
so?" 
"of course," i replied, and "such is often done by men of business, 
who do not like the whole of their affairs to be known by any one 
person." 
"good!" he said, and then went on to ask about the means of making 
consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all sorts of 
difficulties which might arise, but by forethought could be guarded 
against. i explained all these things to him to the best of my 
ability, and he certainly left me under the impression that he would 
have made a wonderful solicitor, for there was nothing that he did not 
think of or foresee. for a man who was never in the country, and who 
did not evidently do much in the way of business, his knowledge and 
acumen were wonderful. when he had satisfied himself on these points 
of which he had spoken, and i had verified all as well as i could by 
the books available, he suddenly stood up and said, "have you written 
since your first letter to our friend mr. peter hawkins, or to any 
other?" 
it was with some bitterness in my heart that i answered that i had 
not, that as yet i had not seen any opportunity of sending letters to 
anybody. 
"then write now, my young friend," he said, laying a heavy hand on my 
shoulder, "write to our friend and to any other, and say, if it will 
please you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now." 
"do you wish me to stay so long?" i asked, for my heart grew cold at 
the thought. 
"i desire it much, nay i will take no refusal. when your master, 
employer, what you will, engaged that someone should come on his 
behalf, it was understood that my needs only were to be consulted. i 
have not stinted. is it not so?" 
what could i do but bow acceptance? it was mr. hawkins' interest, not 
mine, and i had to think of him, not myself, and besides, while count 
dracula was speaking, there was that in his eyes and in his bearing 
which made me remember that i was a prisoner, and that if i wished it 
i could have no choice. the count saw his victory in my bow, and his 
mastery in the trouble of my face, for he began at once to use them, 
but in his own smooth, resistless way. 
"i pray you, my good young friend, that you will not discourse of 
things other than business in your letters. it will doubtless please 
your friends to know that you are well, and that you look forward to 
getting home to them. is it not so?" as he spoke he handed me three 
sheets of note paper and three envelopes. they were all of the 
thinnest foreign post, and looking at them, then at him, and noticing 
his quiet smile, with the sharp, canine teeth lying over the red 
underlip, i understood as well as if he had spoken that i should be 
more careful what i wrote, for he would be able to read it. so i 
determined to write only formal notes now, but to write fully to mr. 
hawkins in secret, and also to mina, for to her i could write 
shorthand, which would puzzle the count, if he did see it. when i had 
written my two letters i sat quiet, reading a book whilst the count 
wrote several notes, referring as he wrote them to some books on his 
table. then he took up my two and placed them with his own, and put 
by his writing materials, after which, the instant the door had closed 
behind him, i leaned over and looked at the letters, which were face 
down on the table. i felt no compunction in doing so for under the 
circumstances i felt that i should protect myself in every way i 
could. 
one of the letters was directed to samuel f. billington, no. 7, the 
crescent, whitby, another to herr leutner, varna. the third was to 
coutts & co., london, and the fourth to herren klopstock & billreuth, 
bankers, buda pesth. the second and fourth were unsealed. i was just 
about to look at them when i saw the door handle move. i sank back in 
my seat, having just had time to resume my book before the count, 
holding still another letter in his hand, entered the room. he took 
up the letters on the table and stamped them carefully, and then 
turning to me, said, 
"i trust you will forgive me, but i have much work to do in private 
this evening. you will, i hope, find all things as you wish." at the 
door he turned, and after a moment's pause said, "let me advise you, 
my dear young friend. nay, let me warn you with all seriousness, that 
should you leave these rooms you will not by any chance go to sleep in 
any other part of the castle. it is old, and has many memories, and 
there are bad dreams for those who sleep unwisely. be warned! should 
sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do, then haste to your 
own chamber or to these rooms, for your rest will then be safe. but 
if you be not careful in this respect, then," he finished his speech 
in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands as if he were washing 
them. i quite understood. my only doubt was as to whether any dream 
could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible net of gloom and 
mystery which seemed closing around me. 
later.-i endorse the last words written, but this time there is no 
doubt in question. i shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is 
not. i have placed the crucifix over the head of my bed, i imagine 
that my rest is thus freer from dreams, and there it shall remain. 
when he left me i went to my room. after a little while, not hearing 
any sound, i came out and went up the stone stair to where i could 
look out towards the south. there was some sense of freedom in the 
vast expanse, inaccessible though it was to me, as compared with the 
narrow darkness of the courtyard. looking out on this, i felt that i 
was indeed in prison, and i seemed to want a breath of fresh air, 
though it were of the night. i am beginning to feel this nocturnal 
existence tell on me. it is destroying my nerve. i start at my own 
shadow, and am full of all sorts of horrible imaginings. god knows 
that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! i 
looked out over the beautiful expanse, bathed in soft yellow moonlight 
till it was almost as light as day. in the soft light the distant 
hills became melted, and the shadows in the valleys and gorges of 
velvety blackness. the mere beauty seemed to cheer me. there was 
peace and comfort in every breath i drew. as i leaned from the window 
my eye was caught by something moving a storey below me, and somewhat 
to my left, where i imagined, from the order of the rooms, that the 
windows of the count's own room would look out. the window at which i 
stood was tall and deep, stone-mullioned, and though weatherworn, was 
still complete. but it was evidently many a day since the case had 
been there. i drew back behind the stonework, and looked carefully 
out. 
what i saw was the count's head coming out from the window. i did not 
see the face, but i knew the man by the neck and the movement of his 
back and arms. in any case i could not mistake the hands which i had 
had some many opportunities of studying. i was at first interested 
and somewhat amused, for it is wonderful how small a matter will 
interest and amuse a man when he is a prisoner. but my very feelings 
changed to repulsion and terror when i saw the whole man slowly emerge 
from the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall over the 
dreadful abyss, face down with his cloak spreading out around him like 
great wings. at first i could not believe my eyes. i thought it was 
some trick of the moonlight, some weird effect of shadow, but i kept 
looking, and it could be no delusion. i saw the fingers and toes 
grasp the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the 
stress of years, and by thus using every projection and inequality 
move downwards with considerable speed, just as a lizard moves along a 
wall. 
what manner of man is this, or what manner of creature, is it in the 
semblance of man? i feel the dread of this horrible place 
overpowering me. i am in fear, in awful fear, and there is no escape 
for me. i am encompassed about with terrors that i dare not think of. 
15 may.-once more i have seen the count go out in his lizard fashion. 
he moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down, and a 
good deal to the left. he vanished into some hole or window. when 
his head had disappeared, i leaned out to try and see more, but 
without avail. the distance was too great to allow a proper angle of 
sight. i knew he had left the castle now, and thought to use the 
opportunity to explore more than i had dared to do as yet. i went 
back to the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. they were 
all locked, as i had expected, and the locks were comparatively new. 
but i went down the stone stairs to the hall where i had entered 
originally. i found i could pull back the bolts easily enough and 
unhook the great chains. but the door was locked, and the key was 
gone! that key must be in the count's room. i must watch should his 
door be unlocked, so that i may get it and escape. i went on to make 
a thorough examination of the various stairs and passages, and to try 
the doors that opened from them. one or two small rooms near the hall 
were open, but there was nothing to see in them except old furniture, 
dusty with age and moth-eaten. at last, however, i found one door at 
the top of the stairway which, though it seemed locked, gave a little 
under pressure. i tried it harder, and found that it was not really 
locked, but that the resistance came from the fact that the hinges had 
fallen somewhat, and the heavy door rested on the floor. here was an 
opportunity which i might not have again, so i exerted myself, and 
with many efforts forced it back so that i could enter. i was now in 
a wing of the castle further to the right than the rooms i knew and a 
storey lower down. from the windows i could see that the suite of 
rooms lay along to the south of the castle, the windows of the end 
room looking out both west and south. on the latter side, as well as 
to the former, there was a great precipice. the castle was built on 
the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was quite 
impregnable, and great windows were placed here where sling, or bow, 
or culverin could not reach, and consequently light and comfort, 
impossible to a position which had to be guarded, were secured. to 
the west was a great valley, and then, rising far away, great jagged 
mountain fastnesses, rising peak on peak, the sheer rock studded with 
mountain ash and thorn, whose roots clung in cracks and crevices and 
crannies of the stone. this was evidently the portion of the castle 
occupied by the ladies in bygone days, for the furniture had more an 
air of comfort than any i had seen. 
the windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in 
through the diamond panes, enabled one to see even colours, whilst it 
softened the wealth of dust which lay over all and disguised in some 
measure the ravages of time and moth. my lamp seemed to be of little 
effect in the brilliant moonlight, but i was glad to have it with me, 
for there was a dread loneliness in the place which chilled my heart 
and made my nerves tremble. still, it was better than living alone in 
the rooms which i had come to hate from the presence of the count, and 
after trying a little to school my nerves, i found a soft quietude 
come over me. here i am, sitting at a little oak table where in old 
times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much thought and many 
blushes, her ill-spelt love letter, and writing in my diary in 
shorthand all that has happened since i closed it last. it is the 
nineteenth century up-to-date with a vengeance. and yet, unless my 
senses deceive me, the old centuries had, and have, powers of their 
own which mere "modernity" cannot kill. 
later: the morning of 16 may.-god preserve my sanity, for to this i 
am reduced. safety and the assurance of safety are things of the 
past. whilst i live on here there is but one thing to hope for, that 
i may not go mad, if, indeed, i be not mad already. if i be sane, 
then surely it is maddening to think that of all the foul things that 
lurk in this hateful place the count is the least dreadful to me, that 
to him alone i can look for safety, even though this be only whilst i 
can serve his purpose. great god! merciful god, let me be calm, for 
out of that way lies madness indeed. i begin to get new lights on 
certain things which have puzzled me. up to now i never quite knew 
what shakespeare meant when he made hamlet say, "my tablets! quick, 
my tablets! 'tis meet that i put it down," etc., for now, feeling as 
though my own brain were unhinged or as if the shock had come which 
must end in its undoing, i turn to my diary for repose. the habit of 
entering accurately must help to soothe me. 
the count's mysterious warning frightened me at the time. it frightens 
me more not when i think of it, for in the future he has a fearful 
hold upon me. i shall fear to doubt what he may say! 
when i had written in my diary and had fortunately replaced the book 
and pen in my pocket i felt sleepy. the count's warning came into my 
mind, but i took pleasure in disobeying it. the sense of sleep was 
upon me, and with it the obstinacy which sleep brings as outrider. the 
soft moonlight soothed, and the wide expanse without gave a sense of 
freedom which refreshed me. i determined not to return tonight to the 
gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat 
and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad 
for their menfolk away in the midst of remorseless wars. i drew a 
great couch out of its place near the corner, so that as i lay, i 
could look at the lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and 
uncaring for the dust, composed myself for sleep. i suppose i must 
have fallen asleep. i hope so, but i fear, for all that followed was 
startlingly real, so real that now sitting here in the broad, full 
sunlight of the morning, i cannot in the least believe that it was all 
sleep. 
i was not alone. the room was the same, unchanged in any way since i 
came into it. i could see along the floor, in the brilliant 
moonlight, my own footsteps marked where i had disturbed the long 
accumulation of dust. in the moonlight opposite me were three young 
women, ladies by their dress and manner. i thought at the time that i 
must be dreaming when i saw them, they threw no shadow on the floor. 
they came close to me, and looked at me for some time, and then 
whispered together. two were dark, and had high aquiline noses, like 
the count, and great dark, piercing eyes, that seemed to be almost red 
when contrasted with the pale yellow moon. the other was fair, as 
fair as can be, with great masses of golden hair and eyes like pale 
sapphires. i seemed somehow to know her face, and to know it in 
connection with some dreamy fear, but i could not recollect at the 
moment how or where. all three had brilliant white teeth that shone 
like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. there was 
something about them that made me uneasy, some longing and at the same 
time some deadly fear. i felt in my heart a wicked, burning desire 
that they would kiss me with those red lips. it is not good to note 
this down, lest some day it should meet mina's eyes and cause her 
pain, but it is the truth. they whispered together, and then they all 
three laughed, such a silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as though 
the sound never could have come through the softness of human lips. 
it was like the intolerable, tingling sweetness of waterglasses when 
played on by a cunning hand. the fair girl shook her head 
coquettishly, and the other two urged her on. 
one said, "go on! you are first, and we shall follow. yours is the 
right to begin." 
the other added, "he is young and strong. there are kisses for us 
all." 
i lay quiet, looking out from under my eyelashes in an agony of 
delightful anticipation. the fair girl advanced and bent over me till 
i could feel the movement of her breath upon me. sweet it was in one 
sense, honey-sweet, and sent the same tingling through the nerves as 
her voice, but with a bitter underlying the sweet, a bitter 
offensiveness, as one smells in blood. 
i was afraid to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly 
under the lashes. the girl went on her knees, and bent over me, 
simply gloating. there was a deliberate voluptuousness which was both 
thrilling and repulsive, and as she arched her neck she actually 
licked her lips like an animal, till i could see in the moonlight the 
moisture shining on the scarlet lips and on the red tongue as it 
lapped the white sharp teeth. lower and lower went her head as the 
lips went below the range of my mouth and chin and seemed to fasten on 
my throat. then she paused, and i could hear the churning sound of 
her tongue as it licked her teeth and lips, and i could feel the hot 
breath on my neck. then the skin of my throat began to tingle as 
one's flesh does when the hand that is to tickle it approaches nearer, 
nearer. i could feel the soft, shivering touch of the lips on the 
super sensitive skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp 
teeth, just touching and pausing there. i closed my eyes in 
languorous ecstasy and waited, waited with beating heart. 
but at that instant, another sensation swept through me as quick as 
lightning. i was conscious of the presence of the count, and of his 
being as if lapped in a storm of fury. as my eyes opened 
involuntarily i saw his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the fair 
woman and with giant's power draw it back, the blue eyes transformed 
with fury, the white teeth champing with rage, and the fair cheeks 
blazing red with passion. but the count! never did i imagine such 
wrath and fury, even to the demons of the pit. his eyes were 
positively blazing. the red light in them was lurid, as if the flames 
of hell fire blazed behind them. his face was deathly pale, and the 
lines of it were hard like drawn wires. the thick eyebrows that met 
over the nose now seemed like a heaving bar of white-hot metal. with 
a fierce sweep of his arm, he hurled the woman from him, and then 
motioned to the others, as though he were beating them back. it was 
the same imperious gesture that i had seen used to the wolves. in a 
voice which, though low and almost in a whisper seemed to cut through 
the air and then ring in the room he said, 
"how dare you touch him, any of you? how dare you cast eyes on him 
when i had forbidden it? back, i tell you all! this man belongs to 
me! beware how you meddle with him, or you'll have to deal with me." 
the fair girl, with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him. 
"you yourself never loved. you never love!" on this the other women 
joined, and such a mirthless, hard, soulless laughter rang through the 
room that it almost made me faint to hear. it seemed like the 
pleasure of fiends. 
then the count turned, after looking at my face attentively, and said 
in a soft whisper, "yes, i too can love. you yourselves can tell it 
from the past. is it not so? well, now i promise you that when i am 
done with him you shall kiss him at your will. now go! go! i must 
awaken him, for there is work to be done." 
"are we to have nothing tonight?" said one of them, with a low laugh, 
as she pointed to the bag which he had thrown upon the floor, and 
which moved as though there were some living thing within it. for 
answer he nodded his head. one of the women jumped forward and opened 
it. if my ears did not deceive me there was a gasp and a low wail, as 
of a half smothered child. the women closed round, whilst i was 
aghast with horror. but as i looked, they disappeared, and with them 
the dreadful bag. there was no door near them, and they could not 
have passed me without my noticing. they simply seemed to fade into 
the rays of the moonlight and pass out through the window, for i could 
see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment before they entirely 
faded away. 
then the horror overcame me, and i sank down unconscious. 
chapter 4 
jonathan harker's journal continued 
i awoke in my own bed. if it be that i had not dreamt, the count must 
have carried me here. i tried to satisfy myself on the subject, but 
could not arrive at any unquestionable result. to be sure, there were 
certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid 
by in a manner which was not my habit. my watch was still unwound, 
and i am rigorously accustomed to wind it the last thing before going 
to bed, and many such details. but these things are no proof, for 
they may have been evidences that my mind was not as usual, and, for 
some cause or another, i had certainly been much upset. i must watch 
for proof. of one thing i am glad. if it was that the count carried 
me here and undressed me, he must have been hurried in his task, for 
my pockets are intact. i am sure this diary would have been a mystery 
to him which he would not have brooked. he would have taken or 
destroyed it. as i look round this room, although it has been to me 
so full of fear, it is now a sort of sanctuary, for nothing can be 
more dreadful than those awful women, who were, who are, waiting to 
suck my blood. 
18 may.-i have been down to look at that room again in daylight, for 
i must know the truth. when i got to the doorway at the top of the 
stairs i found it closed. it had been so forcibly driven against the 
jamb that part of the woodwork was splintered. i could see that the 
bolt of the lock had not been shot, but the door is fastened from the 
inside. i fear it was no dream, and must act on this surmise. 
19 may.-i am surely in the toils. last night the count asked me in 
the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work here 
was nearly done, and that i should start for home within a few days, 
another that i was starting on the next morning from the time of the 
letter, and the third that i had left the castle and arrived at 
bistritz. i would fain have rebelled, but felt that in the present 
state of things it would be madness to quarrel openly with the count 
whilst i am so absolutely in his power. and to refuse would be to 
excite his suspicion and to arouse his anger. he knows that i know 
too much, and that i must not live, lest i be dangerous to him. my 
only chance is to prolong my opportunities. something may occur which 
will give me a chance to escape. i saw in his eyes something of that 
gathering wrath which was manifest when he hurled that fair woman from 
him. he explained to me that posts were few and uncertain, and that 
my writing now would ensure ease of mind to my friends. and he 
assured me with so much impressiveness that he would countermand the 
later letters, which would be held over at bistritz until due time in 
case chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him 
would have been to create new suspicion. i therefore pretended to 
fall in with his views, and asked him what dates i should put on the 
letters. 
he calculated a minute, and then said, "the first should be june 12, 
the second june 19, and the third june 29." 
i know now the span of my life. god help me! 
28 may.-there is a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able to 
send word home. a band of szgany have come to the castle, and are 
encamped in the courtyard. these are gipsies. i have notes of them 
in my book. they are peculiar to this part of the world, though 
allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world over. there are 
thousands of them in hungary and transylvania, who are almost outside 
all law. they attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or 
boyar, and call themselves by his name. they are fearless and without 
religion, save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of 
the romany tongue. 
i shall write some letters home, and shall try to get them to have 
them posted. i have already spoken to them through my window to begin 
acquaintanceship. they took their hats off and made obeisance and 
many signs, which however, i could not understand any more than i 
could their spoken language . . . 
i have written the letters. mina's is in shorthand, and i simply ask 
mr. hawkins to communicate with her. to her i have explained my 
situation, but without the horrors which i may only surmise. it would 
shock and frighten her to death were i to expose my heart to her. 
should the letters not carry, then the count shall not yet know my 
secret or the extent of my knowledge. . . . 
i have given the letters. i threw them through the bars of my window 
with a gold piece, and made what signs i could to have them posted. 
the man who took them pressed them to his heart and bowed, and then 
put them in his cap. i could do no more. i stole back to the study, 
and began to read. as the count did not come in, i have written 
here . . . 
the count has come. he sat down beside me, and said in his smoothest 
voice as he opened two letters, "the szgany has given me these, of 
which, though i know not whence they come, i shall, of course, take 
care. see!"-he must have looked at it.-"one is from you, and to my 
friend peter hawkins. the other,"-here he caught sight of the 
strange symbols as he opened the envelope, and the dark look came into 
his face, and his eyes blazed wickedly,-"the other is a vile thing, 
an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! it is not signed. well! 
so it cannot matter to us." and he calmly held letter and envelope in 
the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. 
then he went on, "the letter to hawkins, that i shall, of course send 
on, since it is yours. your letters are sacred to me. your pardon, 
my friend, that unknowingly i did break the seal. will you not cover 
it again?" he held out the letter to me, and with a courteous bow 
handed me a clean envelope. 
i could only redirect it and hand it to him in silence. when he went 
out of the room i could hear the key turn softly. a minute later i 
went over and tried it, and the door was locked. 
when, an hour or two after, the count came quietly into the room, his 
coming awakened me, for i had gone to sleep on the sofa. he was very 
courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that i had been 
sleeping, he said, "so, my friend, you are tired? get to bed. there 
is the surest rest. i may not have the pleasure of talk tonight, 
since there are many labours to me, but you will sleep, i pray." 
i passed to my room and went to bed, and, strange to say, slept 
without dreaming. despair has its own calms. 
31 may.-this morning when i woke i thought i would provide myself 
with some papers and envelopes from my bag and keep them in my pocket, 
so that i might write in case i should get an opportunity, but again a 
surprise, again a shock! 
every scrap of paper was gone, and with it all my notes, my memoranda, 
relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact all that 
might be useful to me were i once outside the castle. i sat and 
pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and i made 
search of my portmanteau and in the wardrobe where i had placed my 
clothes. 
the suit in which i had travelled was gone, and also my overcoat and 
rug. i could find no trace of them anywhere. this looked like some 
new scheme of villainy . . . 
17 june.-this morning, as i was sitting on the edge of my bed 
cudgelling my brains, i heard without a crackling of whips and 
pounding and scraping of horses' feet up the rocky path beyond the 
courtyard. with joy i hurried to the window, and saw drive into the 
yard two great leiter-wagons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and 
at the head of each pair a slovak, with his wide hat, great 
nail-studded belt, dirty sheepskin, and high boots. they had also 
their long staves in hand. i ran to the door, intending to descend 
and try and join them through the main hall, as i thought that way 
might be opened for them. again a shock, my door was fastened on the 
outside. 
then i ran to the window and cried to them. they looked up at me 
stupidly and pointed, but just then the "hetman" of the szgany came 
out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which 
they laughed. 
henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonized entreaty, 
would make them even look at me. they resolutely turned away. the 
leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick 
rope. these were evidently empty by the ease with which the slovaks 
handled them, and by their resonance as they were roughly moved. 
when they were all unloaded and packed in a great heap in one corner 
of the yard, the slovaks were given some money by the szgany, and 
spitting on it for luck, lazily went each to his horse's head. 
shortly afterwards, i heard the crackling of their whips die away in 
the distance. 
24 june.-last night the count left me early, and locked himself into 
his own room. as soon as i dared i ran up the winding stair, and 
looked out of the window, which opened south. i thought i would watch 
for the count, for there is something going on. the szgany are 
quartered somewhere in the castle and are doing work of some kind. i 
know it, for now and then, i hear a far-away muffled sound as of 
mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be the end of some 
ruthless villainy. 
i had been at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when i saw 
something coming out of the count's window. i drew back and watched 
carefully, and saw the whole man emerge. it was a new shock to me to 
find that he had on the suit of clothes which i had worn whilst 
travelling here, and slung over his shoulder the terrible bag which i 
had seen the women take away. there could be no doubt as to his 
quest, and in my garb, too! this, then, is his new scheme of evil, 
that he will allow others to see me, as they think, so that he may 
both leave evidence that i have been seen in the towns or villages 
posting my own letters, and that any wickedness which he may do shall 
by the local people be attributed to me. 
it makes me rage to think that this can go on, and whilst i am shut up 
here, a veritable prisoner, but without that protection of the law 
which is even a criminal's right and consolation. 
i thought i would watch for the count's return, and for a long time 
sat doggedly at the window. then i began to notice that there were 
some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight. they 
were like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and 
gathered in clusters in a nebulous sort of way. i watched them with a 
sense of soothing, and a sort of calm stole over me. i leaned back in 
the embrasure in a more comfortable position, so that i could enjoy 
more fully the aerial gambolling. 
something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere 
far below in the valley, which was hidden from my sight. louder it 
seemed to ring in my ears, and the floating moats of dust to take new 
shapes to the sound as they danced in the moonlight. i felt myself 
struggling to awake to some call of my instincts. nay, my very soul 
was struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to 
answer the call. i was becoming hypnotised! 
quicker and quicker danced the dust. the moonbeams seemed to quiver 
as they went by me into the mass of gloom beyond. more and more they 
gathered till they seemed to take dim phantom shapes. and then i 
started, broad awake and in full possession of my senses, and ran 
screaming from the place. 
the phantom shapes, which were becoming gradually materialised from 
the moonbeams, were those three ghostly women to whom i was doomed. 
i fled, and felt somewhat safer in my own room, where there was no 
moonlight, and where the lamp was burning brightly. 
when a couple of hours had passed i heard something stirring in the 
count's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed. and 
then there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. with a 
beating heart, i tried the door, but i was locked in my prison, and 
could do nothing. i sat down and simply cried. 
as i sat i heard a sound in the courtyard without, the agonised cry of 
a woman. i rushed to the window, and throwing it up, peered between 
the bars. 
there, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding her hands 
over her heart as one distressed with running. she was leaning 
against the corner of the gateway. when she saw my face at the window 
she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice laden with menace, 
"monster, give me my child!" 
she threw herself on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the 
same words in tones which wrung my heart. then she tore her hair and 
beat her breast, and abandoned herself to all the violences of 
extravagant emotion. finally, she threw herself forward, and though i 
could not see her, i could hear the beating of her naked hands against 
the door. 
somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, i heard the voice of 
the count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. his call seemed to 
be answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves. before many 
minutes had passed a pack of them poured, like a pent-up dam when 
liberated, through the wide entrance into the courtyard. 
there was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves was but 
short. before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips. 
i could not pity her, for i knew now what had become of her child, and 
she was better dead. 
what shall i do? what can i do? how can i escape from this dreadful 
thing of night, gloom, and fear? 
25 june.-no man knows till he has suffered from the night how sweet 
and dear to his heart and eye the morning can be. when the sun grew 
so high this morning that it struck the top of the great gateway 
opposite my window, the high spot which it touched seemed to me as if 
the dove from the ark had lighted there. my fear fell from me as if 
it had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in the warmth. 
i must take action of some sort whilst the courage of the day is upon 
me. last night one of my post-dated letters went to post, the first 
of that fatal series which is to blot out the very traces of my 
existence from the earth. 
let me not think of it. action! 
it has always been at night-time that i have been molested or 
threatened, or in some way in danger or in fear. i have not yet seen 
the count in the daylight. can it be that he sleeps when others wake, 
that he may be awake whilst they sleep? if i could only get into his 
room! but there is no possible way. the door is always locked, no 
way for me. 
yes, there is a way, if one dares to take it. where his body has gone 
why may not another body go? i have seen him myself crawl from his 
window. why should not i imitate him, and go in by his window? the 
chances are desperate, but my need is more desperate still. i shall 
risk it. at the worst it can only be death, and a man's death is not 
a calf's, and the dreaded hereafter may still be open to me. god help 
me in my task! goodbye, mina, if i fail. goodbye, my faithful friend 
and second father. goodbye, all, and last of all mina! 
same day, later.-i have made the effort, and god helping me, have 
come safely back to this room. i must put down every detail in order. 
i went whilst my courage was fresh straight to the window on the south 
side, and at once got outside on this side. the stones are big and 
roughly cut, and the mortar has by process of time been washed away 
between them. i took off my boots, and ventured out on the desperate 
way. i looked down once, so as to make sure that a sudden glimpse of 
the awful depth would not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes 
away from it. i know pretty well the direction and distance of the 
count's window, and made for it as well as i could, having regard to 
the opportunities available. i did not feel dizzy, i suppose i was 
too excited, and the time seemed ridiculously short till i found 
myself standing on the window sill and trying to raise up the sash. i 
was filled with agitation, however, when i bent down and slid feet 
foremost in through the window. then i looked around for the count, 
but with surprise and gladness, made a discovery. the room was 
empty! it was barely furnished with odd things, which seemed to have 
never been used. 
the furniture was something the same style as that in the south rooms, 
and was covered with dust. i looked for the key, but it was not in 
the lock, and i could not find it anywhere. the only thing i found 
was a great heap of gold in one corner, gold of all kinds, roman, and 
british, and austrian, and hungarian, and greek and turkish money, 
covered with a film of dust, as though it had lain long in the ground. 
none of it that i noticed was less than three hundred years old. 
there were also chains and ornaments, some jewelled, but all of them 
old and stained. 
at one corner of the room was a heavy door. i tried it, for, since i 
could not find the key of the room or the key of the outer door, which 
was the main object of my search, i must make further examination, or 
all my efforts would be in vain. it was open, and led through a stone 
passage to a circular stairway, which went steeply down. 
i descended, minding carefully where i went for the stairs were dark, 
being only lit by loopholes in the heavy masonry. at the bottom there 
was a dark, tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly 
odour, the odour of old earth newly turned. as i went through the 
passage the smell grew closer and heavier. at last i pulled open a 
heavy door which stood ajar, and found myself in an old ruined chapel, 
which had evidently been used as a graveyard. the roof was broken, 
and in two places were steps leading to vaults, but the ground had 
recently been dug over, and the earth placed in great wooden boxes, 
manifestly those which had been brought by the slovaks. 
there was nobody about, and i made a search over every inch of the 
ground, so as not to lose a chance. i went down even into the vaults, 
where the dim light struggled, although to do so was a dread to my 
very soul. into two of these i went, but saw nothing except fragments 
of old coffins and piles of dust. in the third, however, i made a 
discovery. 
there, in one of the great boxes, of which there were fifty in all, on 
a pile of newly dug earth, lay the count! he was either dead or 
asleep. i could not say which, for eyes were open and stony, but 
without the glassiness of death, and the cheeks had the warmth of life 
through all their pallor. the lips were as red as ever. but there 
was no sign of movement, no pulse, no breath, no beating of the heart. 
i bent over him, and tried to find any sign of life, but in vain. he 
could not have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed 
away in a few hours. by the side of the box was its cover, pierced 
with holes here and there. i thought he might have the keys on him, 
but when i went to search i saw the dead eyes, and in them dead though 
they were, such a look of hate, though unconscious of me or my 
presence, that i fled from the place, and leaving the count's room by 
the window, crawled again up the castle wall. regaining my room, i 
threw myself panting upon the bed and tried to think. 
29 june.-today is the date of my last letter, and the count has taken 
steps to prove that it was genuine, for again i saw him leave the 
castle by the same window, and in my clothes. as he went down the 
wall, lizard fashion, i wished i had a gun or some lethal weapon, that 
i might destroy him. but i fear that no weapon wrought along by man's 
hand would have any effect on him. i dared not wait to see him 
return, for i feared to see those weird sisters. i came back to the 
library, and read there till i fell asleep. 
i was awakened by the count, who looked at me as grimly as a man could 
look as he said, "tomorrow, my friend, we must part. you return to 
your beautiful england, i to some work which may have such an end that 
we may never meet. your letter home has been despatched. tomorrow i 
shall not be here, but all shall be ready for your journey. in the 
morning come the szgany, who have some labours of their own here, and 
also come some slovaks. when they have gone, my carriage shall come 
for you, and shall bear you to the borgo pass to meet the diligence 
from bukovina to bistritz. but i am in hopes that i shall see more of 
you at castle dracula." 
i suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity. sincerity! it 
seems like a profanation of the word to write it in connection with 
such a monster, so i asked him point-blank, "why may i not go 
tonight?" 
"because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission." 
"but i would walk with pleasure. i want to get away at once." 
he smiled, such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that i knew there was 
some trick behind his smoothness. he said, "and your baggage?" 
"i do not care about it. i can send for it some other time." 
the count stood up, and said, with a sweet courtesy which made me rub 
my eyes, it seemed so real, "you english have a saying which is close 
to my heart, for its spirit is that which rules our boyars, 'welcome 
the coming, speed the parting guest.' come with me, my dear young 
friend. not an hour shall you wait in my house against your will, 
though sad am i at your going, and that you so suddenly desire it. 
come!" with a stately gravity, he, with the lamp, preceded me down 
the stairs and along the hall. suddenly he stopped. "hark!" 
close at hand came the howling of many wolves. it was almost as if 
the sound sprang up at the rising of his hand, just as the music of a 
great orchestra seems to leap under the baton of the conductor. after 
a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, 
drew back the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to 
draw it open. 
to my intense astonishment i saw that it was unlocked. suspiciously, 
i looked all round, but could see no key of any kind. 
as the door began to open, the howling of the wolves without grew 
louder and angrier. their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their 
blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the opening door. i 
knew than that to struggle at the moment against the count was 
useless. with such allies as these at his command, i could do 
nothing. 
but still the door continued slowly to open, and only the count's body 
stood in the gap. suddenly it struck me that this might be the moment 
and means of my doom. i was to be given to the wolves, and at my own 
instigation. there was a diabolical wickedness in the idea great 
enough for the count, and as the last chance i cried out, "shut the 
door! i shall wait till morning." and i covered my face with my 
hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. 
with one sweep of his powerful arm, the count threw the door shut, and 
the great bolts clanged and echoed through the hall as they shot back 
into their places. 
in silence we returned to the library, and after a minute or two i went 
to my own room. the last i saw of count dracula was his kissing his 
hand to me, with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and with a smile 
that judas in hell might be proud of. 
when i was in my room and about to lie down, i thought i heard a 
whispering at my door. i went to it softly and listened. unless my 
ears deceived me, i heard the voice of the count. 
"back! back to your own place! your time is not yet come. wait! 
have patience! tonight is mine. tomorrow night is yours!" 
there was a low, sweet ripple of laughter, and in a rage i threw open 
the door, and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips. 
as i appeared, they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away. 
i came back to my room and threw myself on my knees. it is then so 
near the end? tomorrow! tomorrow! lord, help me, and those to whom 
i am dear! 
30 june.-these may be the last words i ever write in this diary. i 
slept till just before the dawn, and when i woke threw myself on my 
knees, for i determined that if death came he should find me ready. 
at last i felt that subtle change in the air, and knew that the 
morning had come. then came the welcome cockcrow, and i felt that i 
was safe. with a glad heart, i opened the door and ran down the hall. 
i had seen that the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. 
with hands that trembled with eagerness, i unhooked the chains and 
threw back the massive bolts. 
but the door would not move. despair seized me. i pulled and pulled 
at the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its 
casement. i could see the bolt shot. it had been locked after i left 
the count. 
then a wild desire took me to obtain the key at any risk, and i 
determined then and there to scale the wall again, and gain the 
count's room. he might kill me, but death now seemed the happier 
choice of evils. without a pause i rushed up to the east window, and 
scrambled down the wall, as before, into the count's room. it was 
empty, but that was as i expected. i could not see a key anywhere, 
but the heap of gold remained. i went through the door in the corner 
and down the winding stair and along the dark passage to the old 
chapel. i knew now well enough where to find the monster i sought. 
the great box was in the same place, close against the wall, but the 
lid was laid on it, not fastened down, but with the nails ready in 
their places to be hammered home. 
i knew i must reach the body for the key, so i raised the lid, and 
laid it back against the wall. and then i saw something which filled 
my very soul with horror. there lay the count, but looking as if his 
youth had been half restored. for the white hair and moustache were 
changed to dark iron-grey. the cheeks were fuller, and the white skin 
seemed ruby-red underneath. the mouth was redder than ever, for on 
the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the corners of 
the mouth and ran down over the chin and neck. even the deep, burning 
eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for the lids and pouches 
underneath were bloated. it seemed as if the whole awful creature 
were simply gorged with blood. he lay like a filthy leech, exhausted 
with his repletion. 
i shuddered as i bent over to touch him, and every sense in me 
revolted at the contact, but i had to search, or i was lost. the 
coming night might see my own body a banquet in a similar war to those 
horrid three. i felt all over the body, but no sign could i find of 
the key. then i stopped and looked at the count. there was a mocking 
smile on the bloated face which seemed to drive me mad. this was the 
being i was helping to transfer to london, where, perhaps, for 
centuries to come he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his 
lust for blood, and create a new and ever-widening circle of 
semi-demons to batten on the helpless. 
the very thought drove me mad. a terrible desire came upon me to rid 
the world of such a monster. there was no lethal weapon at hand, but 
i seized a shovel which the workmen had been using to fill the cases, 
and lifting it high, struck, with the edge downward, at the hateful 
face. but as i did so the head turned, and the eyes fell upon me, 
with all their blaze of basilisk horror. the sight seemed to paralyze 
me, and the shovel turned in my hand and glanced from the face, merely 
making a deep gash above the forehead. the shovel fell from my hand 
across the box, and as i pulled it away the flange of the blade caught 
the edge of the lid which fell over again, and hid the horrid thing 
from my sight. the last glimpse i had was of the bloated face, 
blood-stained and fixed with a grin of malice which would have held 
its own in the nethermost hell. 
i thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seemed 
on fire, and i waited with a despairing feeling growing over me. as i 
waited i heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices 
coming closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and 
the cracking of whips. the szgany and the slovaks of whom the count 
had spoken were coming. with a last look around and at the box which 
contained the vile body, i ran from the place and gained the count's 
room, determined to rush out at the moment the door should be opened. 
with strained ears, i listened, and heard downstairs the grinding of 
the key in the great lock and the falling back of the heavy door. 
there must have been some other means of entry, or some one had a key 
for one of the locked doors. 
then there came the sound of many feet tramping and dying away in some 
passage which sent up a clanging echo. i turned to run down again 
towards the vault, where i might find the new entrance, but at the 
moment there seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the door to 
the winding stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from the 
lintels flying. when i ran to push it open, i found that it was 
hopelessly fast. i was again a prisoner, and the net of doom was 
closing round me more closely. 
as i write there is in the passage below a sound of many tramping feet 
and the crash of weights being set down heavily, doubtless the boxes, 
with their freight of earth. there was a sound of hammering. it is 
the box being nailed down. now i can hear the heavy feet tramping 
again along the hall, with with many other idle feet coming behind 
them. 
the door is shut, the chains rattle. there is a grinding of the key 
in the lock. i can hear the key withdrawn, then another door opens 
and shuts. i hear the creaking of lock and bolt. 
hark! in the courtyard and down the rocky way the roll of heavy 
wheels, the crack of whips, and the chorus of the szgany as they pass 
into the distance. 
i am alone in the castle with those horrible women. faugh! mina is a 
woman, and there is nought in common. they are devils of the pit! 
i shall not remain alone with them. i shall try to scale the castle 
wall farther than i have yet attempted. i shall take some of the gold 
with me, lest i want it later. i may find a way from this dreadful 
place. 
and then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away 
from the cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil and his 
children still walk with earthly feet! 
at least god's mercy is better than that of those monsters, and the 
precipice is steep and high. at its foot a man may sleep, as a man. 
goodbye, all. mina! 
chapter 5 
letter from miss mina murray to miss lucy westenra 
9 may. 
my dearest lucy, 
forgive my long delay in writing, but i have been simply overwhelmed 
with work. the life of an assistant schoolmistress is sometimes 
trying. i am longing to be with you, and by the sea, where we can 
talk together freely and build our castles in the air. i have been 
working very hard lately, because i want to keep up with jonathan's 
studies, and i have been practicing shorthand very assiduously. 
when we are married i shall be able to be useful to jonathan, and if 
i can stenograph well enough i can take down what he wants to say in 
this way and write it out for him on the typewriter, at which also i 
am practicing very hard. 
he and i sometimes write letters in shorthand, and he is 
keeping a stenographic journal of his travels abroad. when 
i am with you i shall keep a diary in the same way. i don't 
mean one of those two-pages-to-the-week-with-sunday-squeezed- 
in-a-corner diaries, but a sort of journal which i can write 
in whenever i feel inclined. 
i do not suppose there will be much of interest to other people, but 
it is not intended for them. i may show it to jonathan some day if 
there is in it anything worth sharing, but it is really an exercise 
book. i shall try to do what i see lady journalists do, 
interviewing and writing descriptions and trying to remember 
conversations. i am told that, with a little practice, one can 
remember all that goes on or that one hears said during a day. 
however, we shall see. i will tell you of my little plans when we 
meet. i have just had a few hurried lines from jonathan from 
transylvania. he is well, and will be returning in about a week. i 
am longing to hear all his news. it must be nice to see strange 
countries. i wonder if we, i mean jonathan and i, shall ever see 
them together. there is the ten o'clock bell ringing. goodbye. 
your loving 
mina 
tell me all the news when you write. you have not told me 
anything for a long time. i hear rumours, and especially 
of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man??? 
letter, lucy westenra to mina murray 
17, chatham street 
wednesday 
my dearest mina, 
i must say you tax me very unfairly with being a bad correspondent. 
i wrote you twice since we parted, and your last letter was only 
your second. besides, i have nothing to tell you. there is really 
nothing to interest you. 
town is very pleasant just now, and we go a great deal to 
picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. as 
to the tall, curly-haired man, i suppose it was the one who 
was with me at the last pop. someone has evidently been 
telling tales. 
that was mr. holmwood. he often comes to see us, and he and 
mamma get on very well together, they have so many things 
to talk about in common. 
we met some time ago a man that would just do for you, if you were 
not already engaged to jonathan. he is an excellent parti, being 
handsome, well off, and of good birth. he is a doctor and really 
clever. just fancy! he is only nine-and twenty, and he has an 
immense lunatic asylum all under his own care. mr. holmwood 
introduced him to me, and he called here to see us, and often comes 
now. i think he is one of the most resolute men i ever saw, and yet 
the most calm. he seems absolutely imperturbable. i can fancy what 
a wonderful power he must have over his patients. he has a curious 
habit of looking one straight in the face, as if trying to read 
one's thoughts. he tries this on very much with me, but i flatter 
myself he has got a tough nut to crack. i know that from my glass. 
do you ever try to read your own face? i do, and i can 
tell you it is not a bad study, and gives you more trouble 
than you can well fancy if you have never tried it. 
he says that i afford him a curious psychological study, and 
i humbly think i do. i do not, as you know, take sufficient 
interest in dress to be able to describe the new fashions. 
dress is a bore. that is slang again, but never mind. arthur 
says that every day. 
there, it is all out, mina, we have told all our secrets to 
each other since we were children. we have slept together 
and eaten together, and laughed and cried together, and 
now, though i have spoken, i would like to speak more. oh, 
mina, couldn't you guess? i love him. i am blushing as i 
write, for although i think he loves me, he has not told me 
so in words. but, oh, mina, i love him. i love him! there, 
that does me good. 
i wish i were with you, dear, sitting by the fire undressing, as we 
used to sit, and i would try to tell you what i feel. i do not know 
how i am writing this even to you. i am afraid to stop, or i should 
tear up the letter, and i don't want to stop, for i do so want to 
tell you all. let me hear from you at once, and tell me all that you 
think about it. mina, pray for my happiness. 
lucy 
p.s.-i need not tell you this is a secret. 
goodnight again. l. 
letter, lucy westenra to mina murray 
24 may 
my dearest mina, 
thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter. it 
was so nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy. 
my dear, it never rains but it pours. how true the old proverbs 
are. here am i, who shall be twenty in september, and yet i never 
had a proposal till today, not a real proposal, and today i had 
three. just fancy! three proposals in one day! isn't it awful! i 
feel sorry, really and truly sorry, for two of the poor fellows. 
oh, mina, i am so happy that i don't know what to do with myself. 
and three proposals! but, for goodness' sake, don't tell any of the 
girls, or they would be getting all sorts of extravagant ideas, and 
imagining themselves injured and slighted if in their very first day 
at home they did not get six at least. some girls are so vain! you 
and i, mina dear, who are engaged and are going to settle down soon 
soberly into old married women, can despise vanity. well, i must 
tell you about the three, but you must keep it a secret, dear, from 
every one except, of course, jonathan. you will tell him, because i 
would, if i were in your place, certainly tell arthur. a woman 
ought to tell her husband everything. don't you think so, dear? and 
i must be fair. men like women, certainly their wives, to be quite 
as fair as they are. and women, i am afraid, are not always quite 
as fair as they should be. 
well, my dear, number one came just before lunch. i told you of 
him, dr. john seward, the lunatic asylum man, with the strong jaw 
and the good forehead. he was very cool outwardly, but was nervous 
all the same. he had evidently been schooling himself as to all 
sorts of little things, and remembered them, but he almost managed 
to sit down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do when they 
are cool, and then when he wanted to appear at ease he kept playing 
with a lancet in a way that made me nearly scream. he spoke to me, 
mina, very straightforwardly. he told me how dear i was to him, 
though he had known me so little, and what his life would be with me 
to help and cheer him. he was going to tell me how unhappy he would 
be if i did not care for him, but when he saw me cry he said he was 
a brute and would not add to my present trouble. then he broke off 
and asked if i could love him in time, and when i shook my head his 
hands trembled, and then with some hesitation he asked me if i cared 
already for any one else. he put it very nicely, saying that he did 
not want to wring my confidence from me, but only to know, because 
if a woman's heart was free a man might have hope. and then, mina, 
i felt a sort of duty to tell him that there was some one. i only 
told him that much, and then he stood up, and he looked very strong 
and very grave as he took both my hands in his and said he hoped i 
would be happy, and that if i ever wanted a friend i must count him 
one of my best. 
oh, mina dear, i can't help crying, and you must excuse this letter 
being all blotted. being proposed to is all very nice and all that 
sort of thing, but it isn't at all a happy thing when you have to 
see a poor fellow, whom you know loves you honestly, going away and 
looking all broken hearted, and to know that, no matter what he may 
say at the moment, you are passing out of his life. my dear, i must 
stop here at present, i feel so miserable, though i am so happy. 
evening. 
arthur has just gone, and i feel in better spirits than when i 
left off, so i can go on telling you about the day. 
well, my dear, number two came after lunch. he is such a nice 
fellow, an american from texas, and he looks so young and so fresh 
that it seems almost impossible that he has been to so many places 
and has such adventures. i sympathize with poor desdemona when she 
had such a stream poured in her ear, even by a black man. i suppose 
that we women are such cowards that we think a man will save us from 
fears, and we marry him. i know now what i would do if i were a man 
and wanted to make a girl love me. no, i don't, for there was mr. 
morris telling us his stories, and arthur never told any, and 
yet . . . 
my dear, i am somewhat previous. mr. quincy p. morris found me 
alone. it seems that a man always does find a girl alone. no, he 
doesn't, for arthur tried twice to make a chance, and i helping him 
all i could, i am not ashamed to say it now. i must tell you 
beforehand that mr. morris doesn't always speak slang, that is to 
say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is really 
well educated and has exquisite manners, but he found out that it 
amused me to hear him talk american slang, and whenever i was 
present, and there was no one to be shocked, he said such funny 
things. i am afraid, my dear, he has to invent it all, for it fits 
exactly into whatever else he has to say. but this is a way slang 
has. i do not know myself if i shall ever speak slang. i do not 
know if arthur likes it, as i have never heard him use any as yet. 
well, mr. morris sat down beside me and looked as happy and jolly as 
he could, but i could see all the same that he was very nervous. he 
took my hand in his, and said ever so sweetly . . . 
"miss lucy, i know i ain't good enough to regulate the fixin's of 
your little shoes, but i guess if you wait till you find a man that 
is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you 
quit. won't you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go down 
the long road together, driving in double harness?" 
well, he did look so good humoured and so jolly that it didn't seem 
half so hard to refuse him as it did poor dr. seward. so i said, as 
lightly as i could, that i did not know anything of hitching, and 
that i wasn't broken to harness at all yet. then he said that he 
had spoken in a light manner, and he hoped that if he had made a 
mistake in doing so on so grave, so momentous, and occasion for him, 
i would forgive him. he really did look serious when he was saying 
it, and i couldn't help feeling a sort of exultation that he was 
number two in one day. and then, my dear, before i could say a word 
he began pouring out a perfect torrent of love-making, laying his 
very heart and soul at my feet. he looked so earnest over it that i 
shall never again think that a man must be playful always, and never 
earnest, because he is merry at times. i suppose he saw something 
in my face which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with 
a sort of manly fervour that i could have loved him for if i had 
been free . . . 
"lucy, you are an honest hearted girl, i know. i should not be here 
speaking to you as i am now if i did not believe you clean grit, 
right through to the very depths of your soul. tell me, like one 
good fellow to another, is there any one else that you care for? 
and if there is i'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but 
will be, if you will let me, a very faithful friend." 
my dear mina, why are men so noble when we women are so little 
worthy of them? here was i almost making fun of this great hearted, 
true gentleman. i burst into tears, i am afraid, my dear, you will 
think this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one, and i really 
felt very badly. 
why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as 
want her, and save all this trouble? but this is heresy, 
and i must not say it. i am glad to say that, though i was 
crying, i was able to look into mr. morris' brave eyes, and 
i told him out straight . . . 
"yes, there is some one i love, though he has not told me 
yet that he even loves me." i was right to speak to him so 
frankly, for quite a light came into his face, and he put 
out both his hands and took mine, i think i put them into 
his, and said in a hearty way . . . 
"that's my brave girl. it's better worth being late for a chance of 
winning you than being in time for any other girl in the world. 
don't cry, my dear. if it's for me, i'm a hard nut to crack, and i 
take it standing up. if that other fellow doesn't know his 
happiness, well, he'd better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal 
with me. little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, 
and that's rarer than a lover, it's more selfish anyhow. my dear, 
i'm going to have a pretty lonely walk between this and kingdom 
come. won't you give me one kiss? it'll be something to keep off 
the darkness now and then. you can, you know, if you like, for that 
other good fellow, or you could not love him, hasn't spoken yet." 
that quite won me, mina, for it was brave and sweet of him, 
and noble too, to a rival, wasn't it? and he so sad, so i 
leant over and kissed him. 
he stood up with my two hands in his, and as he looked down into my 
face, i am afraid i was blushing very much, he said, "little girl, i 
hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if these things don't make 
us friends nothing ever will. thank you for your sweet honesty to 
me, and goodbye." 
he wrung my hand, and taking up his hat, went straight out of the 
room without looking back, without a tear or a quiver or a pause, 
and i am crying like a baby. 
oh, why must a man like that be made unhappy when there are lots of 
girls about who would worship the very ground he trod on? i know i 
would if i were free, only i don't want to be free. my dear, this 
quite upset me, and i feel i cannot write of happiness just at once, 
after telling you of it, and i don't wish to tell of the number 
three until it can be all happy. ever your loving . . . 
lucy 
p.s.-oh, about number three, i needn't tell you of number 
three, need i? besides, it was all so confused. it seemed 
only a moment from his coming into the room till both his 
arms were round me, and he was kissing me. i am very, very 
happy, and i don't know what i have done to deserve it. i 
must only try in the future to show that i am not ungrateful 
to god for all his goodness to me in sending to me such a 
lover, such a husband, and such a friend. 
goodbye. 
dr. seward's diary (kept in phonograph) 
25 may.-ebb tide in appetite today. cannot eat, cannot rest, so 
diary instead. since my rebuff of yesterday i have a sort of empty 
feeling. nothing in the world seems of sufficient importance to be 
worth the doing. as i knew that the only cure for this sort of thing 
was work, i went amongst the patients. i picked out one who has 
afforded me a study of much interest. he is so quaint that i am 
determined to understand him as well as i can. today i seemed to get 
nearer than ever before to the heart of his mystery. 
i questioned him more fully than i had ever done, with a view to 
making myself master of the facts of his hallucination. in my manner 
of doing it there was, i now see, something of cruelty. i seemed to 
wish to keep him to the point of his madness, a thing which i avoid 
with the patients as i would the mouth of hell. 
(mem., under what circumstances would i not avoid the pit of hell?) 
omnia romae venalia sunt. hell has its price! if there be anything 
behind this instinct it will be valuable to trace it afterwards 
accurately, so i had better commence to do so, therefore . . . 
r. m, renfield, age 59. sanguine temperament, great physical 
strength, morbidly excitable, periods of gloom, ending in some fixed 
idea which i cannot make out. i presume that the sanguine temperament 
itself and the disturbing influence end in a mentally-accomplished 
finish, a possibly dangerous man, probably dangerous if unselfish. in 
selfish men caution is as secure an armour for their foes as for 
themselves. what i think of on this point is, when self is the fixed 
point the centripetal force is balanced with the centrifugal. when 
duty, a cause, etc., is the fixed point, the latter force is 
paramount, and only accident or a series of accidents can balance it. 
letter, quincey p. morris to hon. arthur holmood 
25 may. 
my dear art, 
we've told yarns by the campfire in the prairies, and dressed one 
another's wounds after trying a landing at the marquesas, and drunk 
healths on the shore of titicaca. there are more yarns to be told, 
and other wounds to be healed, and another health to be drunk. 
won't you let this be at my campfire tomorrow night? i have no 
hesitation in asking you, as i know a certain lady is engaged to a 
certain dinner party, and that you are free. there will only be one 
other, our old pal at the korea, jack seward. he's coming, too, and 
we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine cup, and to drink a 
health with all our hearts to the happiest man in all the wide 
world, who has won the noblest heart that god has made and best 
worth winning. we promise you a hearty welcome, and a loving 
greeting, and a health as true as your own right hand. we shall 
both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to a certain 
pair of eyes. come! 
yours, as ever and always, 
quincey p. morris 
telegram from arthur holmwood to quincey p. morris 
26 may 
count me in every time. i bear messages which will make both 
your ears tingle. 
art 
chapter 6 
mina murray's journal 
24 july. whitby.-lucy met me at the station, looking sweeter and 
lovelier than ever, and we drove up to the house at the crescent in 
which they have rooms. this is a lovely place. the little river, the 
esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes near 
the harbour. a great viaduct runs across, with high piers, through 
which the view seems somehow further away than it really is. the 
valley is beautifully green, and it is so steep that when you are on 
the high land on either side you look right across it, unless you are 
near enough to see down. the houses of the old town-the side away 
from us, are all red-roofed, and seem piled up one over the other 
anyhow, like the pictures we see of nuremberg. right over the town is 
the ruin of whitby abbey, which was sacked by the danes, and which is 
the scene of part of "marmion," where the girl was built up in the 
wall. it is a most noble ruin, of immense size, and full of beautiful 
and romantic bits. there is a legend that a white lady is seen in one 
of the windows. between it and the town there is another church, the 
parish one, round which is a big graveyard, all full of tombstones. 
this is to my mind the nicest spot in whitby, for it lies right over 
the town, and has a full view of the harbour and all up the bay to 
where the headland called kettleness stretches out into the sea. it 
descends so steeply over the harbour that part of the bank has fallen 
away, and some of the graves have been destroyed. 
in one place part of the stonework of the graves stretches out over 
the sandy pathway far below. there are walks, with seats beside them, 
through the churchyard, and people go and sit there all day long 
looking at the beautiful view and enjoying the breeze. 
i shall come and sit here often myself and work. indeed, i am writing 
now, with my book on my knee, and listening to the talk of three old 
men who are sitting beside me. they seem to do nothing all day but 
sit here and talk. 
the harbour lies below me, with, on the far side, one long granite 
wall stretching out into the sea, with a curve outwards at the end of 
it, in the middle of which is a lighthouse. a heavy seawall runs 
along outside of it. on the near side, the seawall makes an elbow 
crooked inversely, and its end too has a lighthouse. between the two 
piers there is a narrow opening into the harbour, which then suddenly 
widens. 
it is nice at high water, but when the tide is out it shoals away to 
nothing, and there is merely the stream of the esk, running between 
banks of sand, with rocks here and there. outside the harbour on this 
side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp of 
which runs straight out from behind the south lighthouse. at the end 
of it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather, and sends in 
a mournful sound on the wind. 
they have a legend here that when a ship is lost bells are heard out at 
sea. i must ask the old man about this. he is coming this way . . . 
he is a funny old man. he must be awfully old, for his face is 
gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. he tells me that he is 
nearly a hundred, and that he was a sailor in the greenland fishing 
fleet when waterloo was fought. he is, i am afraid, a very sceptical 
person, for when i asked him about the bells at sea and the white lady 
at the abbey he said very brusquely, 
"i wouldn't fash masel' about them, miss. them things be all wore 
out. mind, i don't say that they never was, but i do say that they 
wasn't in my time. they be all very well for comers and trippers, an' 
the like, but not for a nice young lady like you. them feet-folks 
from york and leeds that be always eatin' cured herrin's and drinkin' 
tea an' lookin' out to buy cheap jet would creed aught. i wonder 
masel' who'd be bothered tellin' lies to them, even the newspapers, 
which is full of fool-talk." 
i thought he would be a good person to learn interesting things from, 
so i asked him if he would mind telling me something about the whale 
fishing in the old days. he was just settling himself to begin when 
the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and said, 
"i must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. my grand-daughter doesn't 
like to be kept waitin' when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to 
crammle aboon the grees, for there be a many of 'em, and miss, i lack 
belly-timber sairly by the clock." 
he hobbled away, and i could see him hurrying, as well as he could, 
down the steps. the steps are a great feature on the place. they 
lead from the town to the church, there are hundreds of them, i do not 
know how many, and they wind up in a delicate curve. the slope is so 
gentle that a horse could easily walk up and down them. 
i think they must originally have had something to do with the abbey. 
i shall go home too. lucy went out, visiting with her mother, and as 
they were only duty calls, i did not go. 
1 august.-i came up here an hour ago with lucy, and we had a most 
interesting talk with my old friend and the two others who always come 
and join him. he is evidently the sir oracle of them, and i should 
think must have been in his time a most dictatorial person. 
he will not admit anything, and down faces everybody. if he can't 
out-argue them he bullies them, and then takes their silence for 
agreement with his views. 
lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock. she has got 
a beautiful colour since she has been here. 
i noticed that the old men did not lose any time in coming and sitting 
near her when we sat down. she is so sweet with old people, i think 
they all fell in love with her on the spot. even my old man succumbed 
and did not contradict her, but gave me double share instead. i got 
him on the subject of the legends, and he went off at once into a sort 
of sermon. i must try to remember it and put it down. 
"it be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel, that's what it be and 
nowt else. these bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' bar-guests an' 
bogles an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women 
a'belderin'. they be nowt but air-blebs. they, an' all grims an' signs 
an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome berk-bodies an' 
railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do 
somethin' that they don't other incline to. it makes me ireful to 
think o' them. why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on 
paper an' preachin' them out of pulpits, does want to be cuttin' them 
on the tombstones. look here all around you in what airt ye will. all 
them steans, holdin' up their heads as well as they can out of their 
pride, is acant, simply tumblin' down with the weight o' the lies 
wrote on them, 'here lies the body' or 'sacred to the memory' wrote on 
all of them, an' yet in nigh half of them there bean't no bodies at 
all, an' the memories of them bean't cared a pinch of snuff about, 
much less sacred. lies all of them, nothin' but lies of one kind or 
another! my gog, but it'll be a quare scowderment at the day of 
judgment when they come tumblin' up in their death-sarks, all jouped 
together an' trying' to drag their tombsteans with them to prove how 
good they was, some of them trimmlin' an' dithering, with their hands 
that dozzened an' slippery from lyin' in the sea that they can't even 
keep their gurp o' them." 
i could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the way in 
which he looked round for the approval of his cronies that he was 
"showing off," so i put in a word to keep him going. 
"oh, mr. swales, you can't be serious. surely these tombstones are 
not all wrong?" 
"yabblins! there may be a poorish few not wrong, savin' where they 
make out the people too good, for there be folk that do think a 
balm-bowl be like the sea, if only it be their own. the whole thing 
be only lies. now look you here. you come here a stranger, an' you 
see this kirkgarth." 
i nodded, for i thought it better to assent, though i did not quite 
understand his dialect. i knew it had something to do with the 
church. 
he went on, "and you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that 
be haped here, snod an' snog?" i assented again. "then that be just 
where the lie comes in. why, there be scores of these laybeds that be 
toom as old dun's 'baccabox on friday night." 
he nudged one of his companions, and they all laughed. "and, my gog! 
how could they be otherwise? look at that one, the aftest abaft the 
bier-bank, read it!" 
i went over and read, "edward spencelagh, master mariner, murdered by 
pirates off the coast of andres, april, 1854, age 30." when i came 
back mr. swales went on, 
"who brought him home, i wonder, to hap him here? murdered off the 
coast of andres! an' you consated his body lay under! why, i could 
name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the greenland seas above," he 
pointed northwards, "or where the currants may have drifted them. 
there be the steans around ye. ye can, with your young eyes, read the 
small print of the lies from here. this braithwaite lowery, i knew 
his father, lost in the lively off greenland in '20, or andrew 
woodhouse, drowned in the same seas in 1777, or john paxton, drowned 
off cape farewell a year later, or old john rawlings, whose 
grandfather sailed with me, drowned in the gulf of finland in '50. do 
ye think that all these men will have to make a rush to whitby when 
the trumpet sounds? i have me antherums aboot it! i tell ye that 
when they got here they'd be jommlin' and jostlin' one another that 
way that it 'ud be like a fight up on the ice in the old days, when 
we'd be at one another from daylight to dark, an' tryin' to tie up our 
cuts by the aurora borealis." this was evidently local pleasantry, for 
the old man cackled over it, and his cronies joined in with gusto. 
"but," i said, "surely you are not quite correct, for you start on the 
assumption that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to 
take their tombstones with them on the day of judgment. do you think 
that will be really necessary?" 
"well, what else be they tombstones for? answer me that, miss!" 
"to please their relatives, i suppose." 
"to please their relatives, you suppose!" this he said with intense 
scorn. "how will it pleasure their relatives to know that lies is 
wrote over them, and that everybody in the place knows that they be 
lies?" 
he pointed to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, 
on which the seat was rested, close to the edge of the cliff. "read 
the lies on that thruff-stone," he said. 
the letters were upside down to me from where i sat, but lucy was more 
opposite to them, so she leant over and read, "sacred to the memory of 
george canon, who died, in the hope of a glorious resurrection, on 
july 29,1873, falling from the rocks at kettleness. this tomb was 
erected by his sorrowing mother to her dearly beloved son. 'he was the 
only son of his mother, and she was a widow.' really, mr. swales, i 
don't see anything very funny in that!" she spoke her comment very 
gravely and somewhat severely. 
"ye don't see aught funny! ha-ha! but that's because ye don't gawm 
the sorrowin' mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was 
acrewk'd, a regular lamiter he was, an' he hated her so that he 
committed suicide in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put 
on his life. he blew nigh the top of his head off with an old musket 
that they had for scarin' crows with. 'twarn't for crows then, for it 
brought the clegs and the dowps to him. that's the way he fell off 
the rocks. and, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, i've often 
heard him say masel' that he hoped he'd go to hell, for his mother was 
so pious that she'd be sure to go to heaven, an' he didn't want to 
addle where she was. now isn't that stean at any rate," he hammered 
it with his stick as he spoke, "a pack of lies? and won't it make 
gabriel keckle when geordie comes pantin' ut the grees with the 
tompstean balanced on his hump, and asks to be took as evidence!" 
i did not know what to say, but lucy turned the conversation as she 
said, rising up, "oh, why did you tell us of this? it is my favourite 
seat, and i cannot leave it, and now i find i must go on sitting over 
the grave of a suicide." 
"that won't harm ye, my pretty, an' it may make poor geordie gladsome 
to have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap. that won't hurt ye. why, 
i've sat here off an' on for nigh twenty years past, an' it hasn't 
done me no harm. don't ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that 
doesn' lie there either! it'll be time for ye to be getting scart 
when ye see the tombsteans all run away with, and the place as bare as 
a stubble-field. there's the clock, and i must gang. my service to 
ye, ladies!" and off he hobbled. 
lucy and i sat awhile, and it was all so beautiful before us that we 
took hands as we sat, and she told me all over again about arthur and 
their coming marriage. that made me just a little heart-sick, for i 
haven't heard from jonathan for a whole month. 
the same day. i came up here alone, for i am very sad. there was no 
letter for me. i hope there cannot be anything the matter with 
jonathan. the clock has just struck nine. i see the lights scattered 
all over the town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and 
sometimes singly. they run right up the esk and die away in the curve 
of the valley. to my left the view is cut off by a black line of roof 
of the old house next to the abbey. the sheep and lambs are bleating 
in the fields away behind me, and there is a clatter of donkeys' hoofs 
up the paved road below. the band on the pier is playing a harsh 
waltz in good time, and further along the quay there is a salvation 
army meeting in a back street. neither of the bands hears the other, 
but up here i hear and see them both. i wonder where jonathan is and 
if he is thinking of me! i wish he were here. 
dr. seward's diary 
5 june.-the case of renfield grows more interesting the more i get to 
understand the man. he has certain qualities very largely developed, 
selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. 
i wish i could get at what is the object of the latter. he seems to 
have some settled scheme of his own, but what it is i do not know. 
his redeeming quality is a love of animals, though, indeed, he has 
such curious turns in it that i sometimes imagine he is only 
abnormally cruel. his pets are of odd sorts. 
just now his hobby is catching flies. he has at present such a 
quantity that i have had myself to expostulate. to my astonishment, 
he did not break out into a fury, as i expected, but took the matter 
in simple seriousness. he thought for a moment, and then said, "may i 
have three days? i shall clear them away." of course, i said that 
would do. i must watch him. 
18 june.-he has turned his mind now to spiders, and has got several 
very big fellows in a box. he keeps feeding them his flies, and the 
number of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he has 
used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his room. 
1 july.-his spiders are now becoming as great a nuisance as his 
flies, and today i told him that he must get rid of them. 
he looked very sad at this, so i said that he must some of them, at 
all events. he cheerfully acquiesced in this, and i gave him the same 
time as before for reduction. 
he disgusted me much while with him, for when a horrid blowfly, 
bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, he caught it, 
held it exultantly for a few moments between his finger and thumb, and 
before i knew what he was going to do, put it in his mouth and ate it. 
i scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it was very good and 
very wholesome, that it was life, strong life, and gave life to him. 
this gave me an idea, or the rudiment of one. i must watch how he 
gets rid of his spiders. 
he has evidently some deep problem in his mind, for he keeps a little 
notebook in which he is always jotting down something. whole pages of 
it are filled with masses of figures, generally single numbers added 
up in batches, and then the totals added in batches again, as though 
he were focussing some account, as the auditors put it. 
8 july.-there is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary idea in 
my mind is growing. it will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, 
unconscious cerebration, you will have to give the wall to your 
conscious brother. 
i kept away from my friend for a few days, so that i might notice if 
there were any change. things remain as they were except that he has 
parted with some of his pets and got a new one. 
he has managed to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. 
his means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have 
diminished. those that do remain, however, are well fed, for he still 
brings in the flies by tempting them with his food. 
19 july-we are progressing. my friend has now a whole colony of 
sparrows, and his flies and spiders are almost obliterated. when i 
came in he ran to me and said he wanted to ask me a great favour, a 
very, very great favour. and as he spoke, he fawned on me like a dog. 
i asked him what it was, and he said, with a sort of rapture in his 
voice and bearing, "a kitten, a nice, little, sleek playful kitten, 
that i can play with, and teach, and feed, and feed, and feed!" 
i was not unprepared for this request, for i had noticed how his pets 
went on increasing in size and vivacity, but i did not care that his 
pretty family of tame sparrows should be wiped out in the same manner 
as the flies and spiders. so i said i would see about it, and asked 
him if he would not rather have a cat than a kitten. 
his eagerness betrayed him as he answered, "oh, yes, i would like a 
cat! i only asked for a kitten lest you should refuse me a cat. no 
one would refuse me a kitten, would they?" 
i shook my head, and said that at present i feared it would not be 
possible, but that i would see about it. his face fell, and i could 
see a warning of danger in it, for there was a sudden fierce, sidelong 
look which meant killing. the man is an undeveloped homicidal 
maniac. i shall test him with his present craving and see how it will 
work out, then i shall know more. 
10 pm.-i have visited him again and found him sitting in a corner 
brooding. when i came in he threw himself on his knees before me and 
implored me to let him have a cat, that his salvation depended upon 
it. 
i was firm, however, and told him that he could not have it, whereupon 
he went without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the 
corner where i had found him. i shall see him in the morning early. 
20 july.-visited renfield very early, before attendant went his 
rounds. found him up and humming a tune. he was spreading out his 
sugar, which he had saved, in the window, and was manifestly beginning 
his fly catching again, and beginning it cheerfully and with a good 
grace. 
i looked around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where 
they were. he replied, without turning round, that they had all flown 
away. there were a few feathers about the room and on his pillow a 
drop of blood. i said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report 
to me if there were anything odd about him during the day. 
11 am.-the attendant has just been to see me to say that renfield has 
been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. "my belief 
is, doctor," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he just 
took and ate them raw!" 
11 pm.-i gave renfield a strong opiate tonight, enough to make even 
him sleep, and took away his pocketbook to look at it. the thought 
that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and the 
theory proved. 
my homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. i shall have to invent a 
new classification for him, and call him a zoophagous (life-eating) 
maniac. what he desires is to absorb as many lives as he can, and he 
has laid himself out to achieve it in a cumulative way. he gave many 
flies to one spider and many spiders to one bird, and then wanted a 
cat to eat the many birds. what would have been his later steps? 
it would almost be worth while to complete the experiment. it might 
be done if there were only a sufficient cause. men sneered at 
vivisection, and yet look at its results today! why not advance 
science in its most difficult and vital aspect, the knowledge of the 
brain? 
had i even the secret of one such mind, did i hold the key to the 
fancy of even one lunatic, i might advance my own branch of science to 
a pitch compared with which burdon-sanderson's physiology or ferrier's 
brain knowledge would be as nothing. if only there were a sufficient 
cause! i must not think too much of this, or i may be tempted. a 
good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not i too be of an 
exceptional brain, congenitally? 
how well the man reasoned. lunatics always do within their own scope. 
i wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. he has 
closed the account most accurately, and today begun a new record. how 
many of us begin a new record with each day of our lives? 
to me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new 
hope, and that truly i began a new record. so it shall be until the 
great recorder sums me up and closes my ledger account with a balance 
to profit or loss. 
oh, lucy, lucy, i cannot be angry with you, nor can i be angry with my 
friend whose happiness is yours, but i must only wait on hopeless and 
work. work! work! 
if i could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there, a good, 
unselfish cause to make me work, that would be indeed happiness. 
mina murray's journal 
26 july.-i am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here. it 
is like whispering to one's self and listening at the same time. and 
there is also something about the shorthand symbols that makes it 
different from writing. i am unhappy about lucy and about jonathan. 
i had not heard from jonathan for some time, and was very concerned, 
but yesterday dear mr. hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a 
letter from him. i had written asking him if he had heard, and he 
said the enclosed had just been received. it is only a line dated 
from castle dracula, and says that he is just starting for home. that 
is not like jonathan. i do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. 
then, too, lucy, although she is so well, has lately taken to her old 
habit of walking in her sleep. her mother has spoken to me about it, 
and we have decided that i am to lock the door of our room every 
night. 
mrs. westenra has got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on 
roofs of houses and along the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly 
wakened and fall over with a despairing cry that echoes all over the 
place. 
poor dear, she is naturally anxious about lucy, and she tells me that 
her husband, lucy's father, had the same habit, that he would get up 
in the night and dress himself and go out, if he were not stopped. 
lucy is to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out 
her dresses and how her house is to be arranged. i sympathise with 
her, for i do the same, only jonathan and i will start in life in a 
very simple way, and shall have to try to make both ends meet. 
mr. holmwood, he is the hon. arthur holmwood, only son of lord 
godalming, is coming up here very shortly, as soon as he can leave 
town, for his father is not very well, and i think dear lucy is 
counting the moments till he comes. 
she wants to take him up in the seat on the churchyard cliff and show 
him the beauty of whitby. i daresay it is the waiting which disturbs 
her. she will be all right when he arrives. 
27 july.-no news from jonathan. i am getting quite uneasy about him, 
though why i should i do not know, but i do wish that he would write, 
if it were only a single line. 
lucy walks more than ever, and each night i am awakened by her moving 
about the room. fortunately, the weather is so hot that she cannot 
get cold. but still, the anxiety and the perpetually being awakened 
is beginning to tell on me, and i am getting nervous and wakeful 
myself. thank god, lucy's health keeps up. mr. holmwood has been 
suddenly called to ring to see his father, who has been taken 
seriously ill. lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it 
does not touch her looks. she is a trifle stouter, and her cheeks are 
a lovely rose-pink. she has lost the anemic look which she had. i 
pray it will all last. 
3 august.-another week gone by, and no news from jonathan, not even 
to mr. hawkins, from whom i have heard. oh, i do hope he is not ill. 
he surely would have written. i look at that last letter of his, but 
somehow it does not satisfy me. it does not read like him, and yet it 
is his writing. there is no mistake of that. 
lucy has not walked much in her sleep the last week, but there is an 
odd concentration about her which i do not understand, even in her 
sleep she seems to be watching me. she tries the door, and finding it 
locked, goes about the room searching for the key. 
6 august.-another three days, and no news. this suspense is getting 
dreadful. if i only knew where to write to or where to go to, i 
should feel easier. but no one has heard a word of jonathan since 
that last letter. i must only pray to god for patience. 
lucy is more excitable than ever, but is otherwise well. last night 
was very threatening, and the fishermen say that we are in for a 
storm. i must try to watch it and learn the weather signs. 
today is a gray day, and the sun as i write is hidden in thick clouds, 
high over kettleness. everything is gray except the green grass, 
which seems like emerald amongst it, gray earthy rock, gray clouds, 
tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the gray sea, into 
which the sandpoints stretch like gray figures. the sea is tumbling 
in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar, muffled in the 
sea-mists drifting inland. the horizon is lost in a gray mist. all 
vastness, the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and there is a 
'brool' over the sea that sounds like some passage of doom. dark 
figures are on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in 
the mist, and seem 'men like trees walking'. the fishing boats are 
racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep 
into the harbour, bending to the scuppers. here comes old mr. swales. 
he is making straight for me, and i can see, by the way he lifts his 
hat, that he wants to talk. 
i have been quite touched by the change in the poor old man. when he 
sat down beside me, he said in a very gentle way, "i want to say 
something to you, miss." 
i could see he was not at ease, so i took his poor old wrinkled hand in 
mine and asked him to speak fully. 
so he said, leaving his hand in mine, "i'm afraid, my deary, that i 
must have shocked you by all the wicked things i've been sayin' about 
the dead, and such like, for weeks past, but i didn't mean them, and i 
want ye to remember that when i'm gone. we aud folks that be daffled, 
and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't altogether like to think 
of it, and we don't want to feel scart of it, and that's why i've took 
to makin' light of it, so that i'd cheer up my own heart a bit. but, 
lord love ye, miss, i ain't afraid of dyin', not a bit, only i don't 
want to die if i can help it. my time must be nigh at hand now, for i 
be aud, and a hundred years is too much for any man to expect. and 
i'm so nigh it that the aud man is already whettin' his scythe. ye 
see, i can't get out o' the habit of caffin' about it all at once. 
the chafts will wag as they be used to. some day soon the angel of 
death will sound his trumpet for me. but don't ye dooal an' greet, my 
deary!"-for he saw that i was crying-"if he should come this very 
night i'd not refuse to answer his call. for life be, after all, only 
a waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin', and death be all 
that we can rightly depend on. but i'm content, for it's comin' to 
me, my deary, and comin' quick. it may be comin' while we be lookin' 
and wonderin'. maybe it's in that wind out over the sea that's 
bringin' with it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. 
look! look!" he cried suddenly. "there's something in that wind and 
in the hoast beyont that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells 
like death. it's in the air. i feel it comin'. lord, make me answer 
cheerful, when my call comes!" he held up his arms devoutly, and 
raised his hat. his mouth moved as though he were praying. after a 
few minutes' silence, he got up, shook hands with me, and blessed me, 
and said goodbye, and hobbled off. it all touched me, and upset me 
very much. 
i was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spyglass under his 
arm. he stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the time 
kept looking at a strange ship. 
"i can't make her out," he said. "she's a russian, by the look of 
her. but she's knocking about in the queerest way. she doesn't know 
her mind a bit. she seems to see the storm coming, but can't decide 
whether to run up north in the open, or to put in here. look there 
again! she is steered mighty strangely, for she doesn't mind the hand 
on the wheel, changes about with every puff of wind. we'll hear more 
of her before this time tomorrow." 
chapter 7 
cutting from "the dailygraph", 8 august 
(pasted in mina murray's journal) 
from a correspondent. 
whitby. 
one of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been 
experienced here, with results both strange and unique. the weather 
had been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the 
month of august. saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, 
and the great body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits 
to mulgrave woods, robin hood's bay, rig mill, runswick, staithes, 
and the various trips in the neighborhood of whitby. the steamers 
emma and scarborough made trips up and down the coast, and there was 
an unusual amount of 'tripping' both to and from whitby. the day 
was unusually fine till the afternoon, when some of the gossips who 
frequent the east cliff churchyard, and from the commanding eminence 
watch the wide sweep of sea visible to the north and east, called 
attention to a sudden show of 'mares tails' high in the sky to the 
northwest. the wind was then blowing from the south-west in the 
mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked 'no. 2, light 
breeze.' 
the coastguard on duty at once made report, and one old fisherman, 
who for more than half a century has kept watch on weather signs 
from the east cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner the coming of a 
sudden storm. the approach of sunset was so very beautiful, so 
grand in its masses of splendidly coloured clouds, that there was 
quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the old 
churchyard to enjoy the beauty. before the sun dipped below the 
black mass of kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, 
its downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset colour, 
flame, purple, pink, green, violet, and all the tints of gold, with 
here and there masses not large, but of seemingly absolute 
blackness, in all sorts of shapes, as well outlined as colossal 
silhouettes. the experience was not lost on the painters, and 
doubtless some of the sketches of the 'prelude to the great storm' 
will grace the r. a and r. i. walls in may next. 
more than one captain made up his mind then and there that his 
'cobble' or his 'mule', as they term the different classes of boats, 
would remain in the harbour till the storm had passed. the wind 
fell away entirely during the evening, and at midnight there was a 
dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on 
the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive nature. 
there were but few lights in sight at sea, for even the coasting 
steamers, which usually hug the shore so closely, kept well to 
seaward, and but few fishing boats were in sight. the only sail 
noticeable was a foreign schooner with all sails set, which was 
seemingly going westwards. the foolhardiness or ignorance of her 
officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she remained in 
sight, and efforts were made to signal her to reduce sail in the 
face of her danger. before the night shut down she was seen with 
sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating swell of 
the sea. 
"as idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean." 
shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air grew quite 
oppressive, and the silence was so marked that the bleating of a 
sheep inland or the barking of a dog in the town was distinctly 
heard, and the band on the pier, with its lively french air, was 
like a dischord in the great harmony of nature's silence. a little 
after midnight came a strange sound from over the sea, and high 
overhead the air began to carry a strange, faint, hollow booming. 
then without warning the tempest broke. with a rapidity which, at 
the time, seemed incredible, and even afterwards is impossible to 
realize, the whole aspect of nature at once became convulsed. the 
waves rose in growing fury, each over-topping its fellow, till in a 
very few minutes the lately glassy sea was like a roaring and 
devouring monster. white-crested waves beat madly on the level 
sands and rushed up the shelving cliffs. others broke over the 
piers, and with their spume swept the lanthorns of the lighthouses 
which rise from the end of either pier of whitby harbour. 
the wind roared like thunder, and blew with such force that it was 
with difficulty that even strong men kept their feet, or clung with 
grim clasp to the iron stanchions. it was found necessary to clear 
the entire pier from the mass of onlookers, or else the fatalities 
of the night would have increased manifold. to add to the 
difficulties and dangers of the time, masses of sea-fog came 
drifting inland. white, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly 
fashion, so dank and damp and cold that it needed but little effort 
of imagination to think that the spirits of those lost at sea were 
touching their living brethren with the clammy hands of death, and 
many a one shuddered as the wreaths of sea-mist swept by. 
at times the mist cleared, and the sea for some distance could be 
seen in the glare of the lightning, which came thick and fast, 
followed by such peals of thunder that the whole sky overhead seemed 
trembling under the shock of the footsteps of the storm. 
some of the scenes thus revealed were of immeasurable grandeur and 
of absorbing interest. the sea, running mountains high, threw 
skywards with each wave mighty masses of white foam, which the 
tempest seemed to snatch at and whirl away into space. here and 
there a fishing boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter 
before the blast, now and again the white wings of a storm-tossed 
seabird. on the summit of the east cliff the new searchlight was 
ready for experiment, but had not yet been tried. the officers in 
charge of it got it into working order, and in the pauses of 
onrushing mist swept with it the surface of the sea. once or twice 
its service was most effective, as when a fishing boat, with gunwale 
under water, rushed into the harbour, able, by the guidance of the 
sheltering light, to avoid the danger of dashing against the piers. 
as each boat achieved the safety of the port there was a shout of 
joy from the mass of people on the shore, a shout which for a moment 
seemed to cleave the gale and was then swept away in its rush. 
before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner 
with all sails set, apparently the same vessel which had been 
noticed earlier in the evening. the wind had by this time backed to 
the east, and there was a shudder amongst the watchers on the cliff 
as they realized the terrible danger in which she now was. 
between her and the port lay the great flat reef on which so many 
good ships have from time to time suffered, and, with the wind 
blowing from its present quarter, it would be quite impossible that 
she should fetch the entrance of the harbour. 
it was now nearly the hour of high tide, but the waves were so great 
that in their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost visible, 
and the schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such speed 
that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if 
it was only in hell". then came another rush of sea-fog, greater 
than any hitherto, a mass of dank mist, which seemed to close on all 
things like a gray pall, and left available to men only the organ of 
hearing, for the roar of the tempest, and the crash of the thunder, 
and the booming of the mighty billows came through the damp oblivion 
even louder than before. the rays of the searchlight were kept fixed 
on the harbour mouth across the east pier, where the shock was 
expected, and men waited breathless. 
the wind suddenly shifted to the northeast, and the remnant of the 
sea fog melted in the blast. and then, mirabile dictu, between the 
piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, 
swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and 
gained the safety of the harbour. the searchlight followed her, and 
a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a 
corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each 
motion of the ship. no other form could be seen on the deck at all. 
a great awe came on all as they realised that the ship, as if by a 
miracle, had found the harbour, unsteered save by the hand of a dead 
man! however, all took place more quickly than it takes to write 
these words. the schooner paused not, but rushing across the 
harbour, pitched herself on that accumulation of sand and gravel 
washed by many tides and many storms into the southeast corner of 
the pier jutting under the east cliff, known locally as tate hill 
pier. 
there was of course a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up 
on the sand heap. every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some 
of the 'top-hammer' came crashing down. but, strangest of all, the 
very instant the shore was touched, an immense dog sprang up on deck 
from below, as if shot up by the concussion, and running forward, 
jumped from the bow on the sand. 
making straight for the steep cliff, where the churchyard hangs over 
the laneway to the east pier so steeply that some of the flat 
tombstones, thruffsteans or through-stones, as they call them in 
whitby vernacular, actually project over where the sustaining cliff 
has fallen away, it disappeared in the darkness, which seemed 
intensified just beyond the focus of the searchlight. 
it so happened that there was no one at the moment on tate hill 
pier, as all those whose houses are in close proximity were either 
in bed or were out on the heights above. thus the coastguard on 
duty on the eastern side of the harbour, who at once ran down to the 
little pier, was the first to climb aboard. the men working the 
searchlight, after scouring the entrance of the harbour without 
seeing anything, then turned the light on the derelict and kept it 
there. the coastguard ran aft, and when he came beside the wheel, 
bent over to examine it, and recoiled at once as though under some 
sudden emotion. this seemed to pique general curiosity, and quite a 
number of people began to run. 
it is a good way round from the west cliff by the draw-bridge to 
tate hill pier, but your correspondent is a fairly good runner, and 
came well ahead of the crowd. when i arrived, however, i found 
already assembled on the pier a crowd, whom the coastguard and 
police refused to allow to come on board. by the courtesy of the 
chief boatman, i was, as your correspondent, permitted to climb on 
deck, and was one of a small group who saw the dead seaman whilst 
actually lashed to the wheel. 
it was no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, 
for not often can such a sight have been seen. the man was simply 
fastened by his hands, tied one over the other, to a spoke of the 
wheel. between the inner hand and the wood was a crucifix, the set 
of beads on which it was fastened being around both wrists and 
wheel, and all kept fast by the binding cords. the poor fellow may 
have been seated at one time, but the flapping and buffeting of the 
sails had worked through the rudder of the wheel and had dragged him 
to and fro, so that the cords with which he was tied had cut the 
flesh to the bone. 
accurate note was made of the state of things, and a doctor, surgeon 
j. m. caffyn, of 33, east elliot place, who came immediately after 
me, declared, after making examination, that the man must have been 
dead for quite two days. 
in his pocket was a bottle, carefully corked, empty save for 
a little roll of paper, which proved to be the addendum to 
the log. 
the coastguard said the man must have tied up his own hands, 
fastening the knots with his teeth. the fact that a coastguard was 
the first on board may save some complications later on, in the 
admiralty court, for coastguards cannot claim the salvage which is 
the right of the first civilian entering on a derelict. already, 
however, the legal tongues are wagging, and one young law student is 
loudly asserting that the rights of the owner are already completely 
sacrificed, his property being held in contravention of the statues 
of mortmain, since the tiller, as emblemship, if not proof, of 
delegated possession, is held in a dead hand. 
it is needless to say that the dead steersman has been reverently 
removed from the place where he held his honourable watch and ward 
till death, a steadfastness as noble as that of the young 
casabianca, and placed in the mortuary to await inquest. 
already the sudden storm is passing, and its fierceness is 
abating. crowds are scattering backward, and the sky is 
beginning to redden over the yorkshire wolds. 
i shall send, in time for your next issue, further details 
of the derelict ship which found her way so miraculously 
into harbour in the storm. 
9 august.-the sequel to the strange arrival of the derelict in the 
storm last night is almost more startling than the thing itself. it 
turns out that the schooner is russian from varna, and is called the 
demeter. she is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with 
only a small amount of cargo, a number of great wooden boxes filled 
with mould. 
this cargo was consigned to a whitby solicitor, mr. s.f. billington, 
of 7, the crescent, who this morning went aboard and took formal 
possession of the goods consigned to him. 
the russian consul, too, acting for the charter-party, took formal 
possession of the ship, and paid all harbour dues, etc. 
nothing is talked about here today except the strange coincidence. 
the officials of the board of trade have been most exacting in 
seeing that every compliance has been made with existing 
regulations. as the matter is to be a 'nine days wonder', they are 
evidently determined that there shall be no cause of other 
complaint. 
a good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog which landed 
when the ship struck, and more than a few of the members of the 
s.p.c.a., which is very strong in whitby, have tried to befriend the 
animal. to the general disappointment, however, it was not to be 
found. it seems to have disappeared entirely from the town. it may 
be that it was frightened and made its way on to the moors, where it 
is still hiding in terror. 
there are some who look with dread on such a possibility, lest later 
on it should in itself become a danger, for it is evidently a fierce 
brute. early this morning a large dog, a half-bred mastiff 
belonging to a coal merchant close to tate hill pier, was found dead 
in the roadway opposite its master's yard. it had been fighting, 
and manifestly had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn 
away, and its belly was slit open as if with a savage claw. 
later.-by the kindness of the board of trade inspector, i have been 
permitted to look over the log book of the demeter, which was in 
order up to within three days, but contained nothing of special 
interest except as to facts of missing men. the greatest interest, 
however, is with regard to the paper found in the bottle, which was 
today produced at the inquest. and a more strange narrative than 
the two between them unfold it has not been my lot to come across. 
as there is no motive for concealment, i am permitted to use them, 
and accordingly send you a transcript, simply omitting technical 
details of seamanship and supercargo. it almost seems as though the 
captain had been seized with some kind of mania before he had got 
well into blue water, and that this had developed persistently 
throughout the voyage. of course my statement must be taken cum 
grano, since i am writing from the dictation of a clerk of the 
russian consul, who kindly translated for me, time being short. 
log of the "demeter" varna to whitby 
written 18 july, things so strange happening, that i shall 
keep accurate note henceforth till we land. 
on 6 july we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes 
of earth. at noon set sail. east wind, fresh. crew, five 
hands . . . two mates, cook, and myself, (captain). 
on 11 july at dawn entered bosphorus. boarded by turkish 
customs officers. backsheesh. all correct. under way at 
4 p.m. 
on 12 july through dardanelles. more customs officers and 
flagboat of guarding squadron. backsheesh again. work of 
officers thorough, but quick. want us off soon. at dark 
passed into archipelago. 
on 13 july passed cape matapan. crew dissatisfied about 
something. seemed scared, but would not speak out. 
on 14 july was somewhat anxious about crew. men all steady 
fellows, who sailed with me before. mate could not make out what 
was wrong. they only told him there was something, and crossed 
themselves. mate lost temper with one of them that day and struck 
him. expected fierce quarrel, but all was quiet. 
on 16 july mate reported in the morning that one of the 
crew, petrofsky, was missing. could not account for it. 
took larboard watch eight bells last night, was relieved by 
amramoff, but did not go to bunk. men more downcast than 
ever. all said they expected something of the kind, but 
would not say more than there was something aboard. mate 
getting very impatient with them. feared some trouble 
ahead. 
on 17 july, yesterday, one of the men, olgaren, came to my cabin, 
and in an awestruck way confided to me that he thought there was a 
strange man aboard the ship. he said that in his watch he had 
been sheltering behind the deckhouse, as there was a rain storm, 
when he saw a tall, thin man, who was not like any of the crew, 
come up the companionway, and go along the deck forward and 
disappear. he followed cautiously, but when he got to bows found 
no one, and the hatchways were all closed. he was in a panic of 
superstitious fear, and i am afraid the panic may spread. to 
allay it, i shall today search the entire ship carefully from stem 
to stern. 
later in the day i got together the whole crew, and told them, as 
they evidently thought there was some one in the ship, we would 
search from stem to stern. first mate angry, said it was folly, 
and to yield to such foolish ideas would demoralise the men, said 
he would engage to keep them out of trouble with the handspike. i 
let him take the helm, while the rest began a thorough search, all 
keeping abreast, with lanterns. we left no corner unsearched. as 
there were only the big wooden boxes, there were no odd corners 
where a man could hide. men much relieved when search over, and 
went back to work cheerfully. first mate scowled, but said 
nothing. 
22 july.-rough weather last three days, and all hands busy 
with sails, no time to be frightened. men seem to have 
forgotten their dread. mate cheerful again, and all on 
good terms. praised men for work in bad weather. passed 
gibraltar and out through straits. all well. 
24 july.-there seems some doom over this ship. already a hand 
short, and entering the bay of biscay with wild weather ahead, and 
yet last night another man lost, disappeared. like the first, he 
came off his watch and was not seen again. men all in a panic of 
fear, sent a round robin, asking to have double watch, as they 
fear to be alone. mate angry. fear there will be some trouble, 
as either he or the men will do some violence. 
28 july.-four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of 
maelstrom, and the wind a tempest. no sleep for any one. 
men all worn out. hardly know how to set a watch, since no 
one fit to go on. second mate volunteered to steer and 
watch, and let men snatch a few hours sleep. wind abating, 
seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is 
steadier. 
29 july.-another tragedy. had single watch tonight, as crew too 
tired to double. when morning watch came on deck could find no 
one except steersman. raised outcry, and all came on deck. 
thorough search, but no one found. are now without second mate, 
and crew in a panic. mate and i agreed to go armed henceforth and 
wait for any sign of cause. 
30 july.-last night. rejoiced we are nearing england. weather 
fine, all sails set. retired worn out, slept soundly, awakened by 
mate telling me that both man of watch and steersman missing. 
only self and mate and two hands left to work ship. 
1 august.-two days of fog, and not a sail sighted. had hoped 
when in the english channel to be able to signal for help or get 
in somewhere. not having power to work sails, have to run before 
wind. dare not lower, as could not raise them again. we seem to 
be drifting to some terrible doom. mate now more demoralised than 
either of men. his stronger nature seems to have worked inwardly 
against himself. men are beyond fear, working stolidly and 
patiently, with minds made up to worst. they are russian, he 
roumanian. 
2 august, midnight.-woke up from few minutes sleep by hearing a 
cry, seemingly outside my port. could see nothing in fog. rushed 
on deck, and ran against mate. tells me he heard cry and ran, but 
no sign of man on watch. one more gone. lord, help us! mate 
says we must be past straits of dover, as in a moment of fog 
lifting he saw north foreland, just as he heard the man cry out. 
if so we are now off in the north sea, and only god can guide us 
in the fog, which seems to move with us, and god seems to have 
deserted us. 
3 august.-at midnight i went to relieve the man at the 
wheel and when i got to it found no one there. the wind 
was steady, and as we ran before it there was no yawing. i 
dared not leave it, so shouted for the mate. after a few 
seconds, he rushed up on deck in his flannels. he looked 
wild-eyed and haggard, and i greatly fear his reason has 
given way. he came close to me and whispered hoarsely, 
with his mouth to my ear, as though fearing the very air 
might hear. "it is here. i know it now. on the watch 
last night i saw it, like a man, tall and thin, and ghastly 
pale. it was in the bows, and looking out. i crept behind 
it, and gave it my knife, but the knife went through it, 
empty as the air." and as he spoke he took the knife and 
drove it savagely into space. then he went on, "but it is 
here, and i'll find it. it is in the hold, perhaps in one 
of those boxes. i'll unscrew them one by one and see. you 
work the helm." and with a warning look and his finger on 
his lip, he went below. there was springing up a choppy 
wind, and i could not leave the helm. i saw him come out 
on deck again with a tool chest and lantern, and go down 
the forward hatchway. he is mad, stark, raving mad, and 
it's no use my trying to stop him. he can't hurt those big 
boxes, they are invoiced as clay, and to pull them about is 
as harmless a thing as he can do. so here i stay and mind 
the helm, and write these notes. i can only trust in god 
and wait till the fog clears. then, if i can't steer to 
any harbour with the wind that is, i shall cut down sails, 
and lie by, and signal for help . . . 
it is nearly all over now. just as i was beginning to hope 
that the mate would come out calmer, for i heard him 
knocking away at something in the hold, and work is good 
for him, there came up the hatchway a sudden, startled 
scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he 
came as if shot from a gun, a raging madman, with his eyes 
rolling and his face convulsed with fear. "save me! save 
me!" he cried, and then looked round on the blanket of fog. 
his horror turned to despair, and in a steady voice he 
said, "you had better come too, captain, before it is too 
late. he is there! i know the secret now. the sea will 
save me from him, and it is all that is left!" before i 
could say a word, or move forward to seize him, he sprang 
on the bulwark and deliberately threw himself into the sea. 
i suppose i know the secret too, now. it was this madman 
who had got rid of the men one by one, and now he has 
followed them himself. god help me! how am i to account 
for all these horrors when i get to port? when i get to 
port! will that ever be? 
4 august.-still fog, which the sunrise cannot pierce, i 
know there is sunrise because i am a sailor, why else i 
know not. i dared not go below, i dared not leave the 
helm, so here all night i stayed, and in the dimness of the 
night i saw it, him! god, forgive me, but the mate was 
right to jump overboard. it was better to die like a man. 
to die like a sailor in blue water, no man can object. but 
i am captain, and i must not leave my ship. but i shall 
baffle this fiend or monster, for i shall tie my hands to 
the wheel when my strength begins to fail, and along with 
them i shall tie that which he, it, dare not touch. and 
then, come good wind or foul, i shall save my soul, and my 
honour as a captain. i am growing weaker, and the night is 
coming on. if he can look me in the face again, i may not 
have time to act. . . if we are wrecked, mayhap this bottle 
may be found, and those who find it may understand. if 
not . . . well, then all men shall know that i have been 
true to my trust. god and the blessed virgin and the 
saints help a poor ignorant soul trying to do his duty . . . 
of course the verdict was an open one. there is no evidence 
to adduce, and whether or not the man himself committed the 
murders there is now none to say. the folk here hold almost 
universally that the captain is simply a hero, and he is to be 
given a public funeral. already it is arranged that his body 
is to be taken with a train of boats up the esk for a piece 
and then brought back to tate hill pier and up the abbey steps, 
for he is to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. the 
owners of more than a hundred boats have already given in their 
names as wishing to follow him to the grave. 
no trace has ever been found of the great dog, at which there is 
much mourning, for, with public opinion in its present state, he 
would, i believe, be adopted by the town. tomorrow will see the 
funeral, and so will end this one more 'mystery of the sea'. 
mina murray's journal 
8 august.-lucy was very restless all night, and i too, could not 
sleep. the storm was fearful, and as it boomed loudly among the 
chimney pots, it made me shudder. when a sharp puff came it seemed to 
be like a distant gun. strangely enough, lucy did not wake, but she 
got up twice and dressed herself. fortunately, each time i awoke in 
time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to 
bed. it is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as 
her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be 
any, disappears, and she yields herself almost exactly to the routine 
of her life. 
early in the morning we both got up and went down to the harbour to see 
if anything had happened in the night. there were very few people 
about, and though the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the 
big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam 
that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the mouth 
of the harbour, like a bullying man going through a crowd. somehow i 
felt glad that jonathan was not on the sea last night, but on land. 
but, oh, is he on land or sea? where is he, and how? i am getting 
fearfully anxious about him. if i only knew what to do, and could do 
anything! 
10 august.-the funeral of the poor sea captain today was most 
touching. every boat in the harbour seemed to be there, and the coffin 
was carried by captains all the way from tate hill pier up to the 
churchyard. lucy came with me, and we went early to our old seat, 
whilst the cortege of boats went up the river to the viaduct and came 
down again. we had a lovely view, and saw the procession nearly all 
the way. the poor fellow was laid to rest near our seat so that we 
stood on it, when the time came and saw everything. 
poor lucy seemed much upset. she was restless and uneasy all the time, 
and i cannot but think that her dreaming at night is telling on her. 
she is quite odd in one thing. she will not admit to me that there is 
any cause for restlessness, or if there be, she does not understand it 
herself. 
there is an additional cause in that poor mr. swales was found dead 
this morning on our seat, his neck being broken. he had evidently, as 
the doctor said, fallen back in the seat in some sort of fright, for 
there was a look of fear and horror on his face that the men said made 
them shudder. poor dear old man! 
lucy is so sweet and sensitive that she feels influences more acutely 
than other people do. just now she was quite upset by a little thing 
which i did not much heed, though i am myself very fond of animals. 
one of the men who came up here often to look for the boats was 
followed by his dog. the dog is always with him. they are both quiet 
persons, and i never saw the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. during 
the service the dog would not come to its master, who was on the seat 
with us, but kept a few yards off, barking and howling. its master 
spoke to it gently, and then harshly, and then angrily. but it would 
neither come nor cease to make a noise. it was in a fury, with its 
eyes savage, and all its hair bristling out like a cat's tail when puss 
is on the war path. 
finally the man too got angry, and jumped down and kicked the dog, and 
then took it by the scruff of the neck and half dragged and half threw 
it on the tombstone on which the seat is fixed. the moment it touched 
the stone the poor thing began to tremble. it did not try to get away, 
but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was in such a pitiable 
state of terror that i tried, though without effect, to comfort it. 
lucy was full of pity, too, but she did not attempt to touch the dog, 
but looked at it in an agonised sort of way. i greatly fear that she 
is of too super sensitive a nature to go through the world without 
trouble. she will be dreaming of this tonight, i am sure. the whole 
agglomeration of things, the ship steered into port by a dead man, his 
attitude, tied to the wheel with a crucifix and beads, the touching 
funeral, the dog, now furious and now in terror, will all afford 
material for her dreams. 
i think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out physically, so i 
shall take her for a long walk by the cliffs to robin hood's bay and 
back. she ought not to have much inclination for sleep-walking then. 
chapter 8 
mina murray's journal 
same day, 11 o'clock p.m.-oh, but i am tired! if it were not that i 
had made my diary a duty i should not open it tonight. we had a lovely 
walk. lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, i think, to some 
dear cows who came nosing towards us in a field close to the 
lighthouse, and frightened the wits out of us. i believe we forgot 
everything, except of course, personal fear, and it seemed to wipe the 
slate clean and give us a fresh start. we had a capital 'severe tea' 
at robin hood's bay in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow 
window right over the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. i believe 
we should have shocked the 'new woman' with our appetites. men are 
more tolerant, bless them! then we walked home with some, or rather 
many, stoppages to rest, and with our hearts full of a constant dread 
of wild bulls. 
lucy was really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as 
we could. the young curate came in, however, and mrs. westenra asked 
him to stay for supper. lucy and i had both a fight for it with the 
dusty miller. i know it was a hard fight on my part, and i am quite 
heroic. i think that some day the bishops must get together and see 
about breeding up a new class of curates, who don't take supper, no 
matter how hard they may be pressed to, and who will know when girls 
are tired. 
lucy is asleep and breathing softly. she has more colour in her cheeks 
than usual, and looks, oh so sweet. if mr. holmwood fell in love with 
her seeing her only in the drawing room, i wonder what he would say if 
he saw her now. some of the 'new women' writers will some day start an 
idea that men and women should be allowed to see each other asleep 
before proposing or accepting. but i suppose the 'new woman' won't 
condescend in future to accept. she will do the proposing herself. and 
a nice job she will make of it too! there's some consolation in that. 
i am so happy tonight, because dear lucy seems better. i really 
believe she has turned the corner, and that we are over her troubles 
with dreaming. i should be quite happy if i only knew if jonathan . . . 
god bless and keep him. 
11 august.-diary again. no sleep now, so i may as well write. i am 
too agitated to sleep. we have had such an adventure, such an 
agonizing experience. i fell asleep as soon as i had closed my diary. 
. . . suddenly i became broad awake, and sat up, with a horrible sense 
of fear upon me, and of some feeling of emptiness around me. the room 
was dark, so i could not see lucy's bed. i stole across and felt for 
her. the bed was empty. i lit a match and found that she was not in 
the room. the door was shut, but not locked, as i had left it. i feared 
to wake her mother, who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw 
on some clothes and got ready to look for her. as i was leaving the 
room it struck me that the clothes she wore might give me some clue to 
her dreaming intention. dressing-gown would mean house, dress outside. 
dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "thank god," i said 
to myself, "she cannot be far, as she is only in her nightdress." 
i ran downstairs and looked in the sitting room. not there! then i 
looked in all the other rooms of the house, with an ever-growing fear 
chilling my heart. finally, i came to the hall door and found it open. 
it was not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught. the 
people of the house are careful to lock the door every night, so i 
feared that lucy must have gone out as she was. there was no time to 
think of what might happen. a vague over-mastering fear obscured all 
details. 
i took a big, heavy shawl and ran out. the clock was striking one as i 
was in the crescent, and there was not a soul in sight. i ran along 
the north terrace, but could see no sign of the white figure which i 
expected. at the edge of the west cliff above the pier i looked across 
the harbour to the east cliff, in the hope or fear, i don't know which, 
of seeing lucy in our favourite seat. 
there was a bright full moon, with heavy black, driving clouds, which 
threw the whole scene into a fleeting diorama of light and shade as 
they sailed across. for a moment or two i could see nothing, as the 
shadow of a cloud obscured st. mary's church and all around it. then 
as the cloud passed i could see the ruins of the abbey coming into 
view, and as the edge of a narrow band of light as sharp as a sword-cut 
moved along, the church and churchyard became gradually visible. 
whatever my expectation was, it was not disappointed, for there, on our 
favourite seat, the silver light of the moon struck a half-reclining 
figure, snowy white. the coming of the cloud was too quick for me to 
see much, for shadow shut down on light almost immediately, but it 
seemed to me as though something dark stood behind the seat where the 
white figure shone, and bent over it. what it was, whether man or 
beast, i could not tell. 
i did not wait to catch another glance, but flew down the steep steps 
to the pier and along by the fish-market to the bridge, which was the 
only way to reach the east cliff. the town seemed as dead, for not a 
soul did i see. i rejoiced that it was so, for i wanted no witness of 
poor lucy's condition. the time and distance seemed endless, and my 
knees trembled and my breath came laboured as i toiled up the endless 
steps to the abbey. i must have gone fast, and yet it seemed to me as 
if my feet were weighted with lead, and as though every joint in my 
body were rusty. 
when i got almost to the top i could see the seat and the white figure, 
for i was now close enough to distinguish it even through the spells of 
shadow. there was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over 
the half-reclining white figure. i called in fright, "lucy! lucy!" 
and something raised a head, and from where i was i could see a white 
face and red, gleaming eyes. 
lucy did not answer, and i ran on to the entrance of the churchyard. 
as i entered, the church was between me and the seat, and for a minute 
or so i lost sight of her. when i came in view again the cloud had 
passed, and the moonlight struck so brilliantly that i could see lucy 
half reclining with her head lying over the back of the seat. she was 
quite alone, and there was not a sign of any living thing about. 
when i bent over her i could see that she was still asleep. her lips 
were parted, and she was breathing, not softly as usual with her, but 
in long, heavy gasps, as though striving to get her lungs full at every 
breath. as i came close, she put up her hand in her sleep and pulled 
the collar of her nightdress close around her, as though she felt the 
cold. i flung the warm shawl over her, and drew the edges tight around 
her neck, for i dreaded lest she should get some deadly chill from the 
night air, unclad as she was. i feared to wake her all at once, so, in 
order to have my hands free to help her, i fastened the shawl at her 
throat with a big safety pin. but i must have been clumsy in my 
anxiety and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her 
breathing became quieter, she put her hand to her throat again and 
moaned. when i had her carefully wrapped up i put my shoes on her 
feet, and then began very gently to wake her. 
at first she did not respond, but gradually she became more and more 
uneasy in her sleep, moaning and sighing occasionally. at last, as 
time was passing fast, and for many other reasons, i wished to get her 
home at once, i shook her forcibly, till finally she opened her eyes 
and awoke. she did not seem surprised to see me, as, of course, she 
did not realize all at once where she was. 
lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such a time, when her body must 
have been chilled with cold, and her mind somewhat appalled at waking 
unclad in a churchyard at night, she did not lose her grace. she 
trembled a little, and clung to me. when i told her to come at once 
with me home, she rose without a word, with the obedience of a child. 
as we passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and lucy noticed me wince. 
she stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes, but i would 
not. however, when we got to the pathway outside the chruchyard, where 
there was a puddle of water, remaining from the storm, i daubed my feet 
with mud, using each foot in turn on the other, so that as we went 
home, no one, in case we should meet any one, should notice my bare 
feet. 
fortune favoured us, and we got home without meeting a soul. once we 
saw a man, who seemed not quite sober, passing along a street in front 
of us. but we hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such 
as there are here, steep little closes, or 'wynds', as they call them 
in scotland. my heart beat so loud all the time sometimes i thought i 
should faint. i was filled with anxiety about lucy, not only for her 
health, lest she should suffer from the exposure, but for her 
reputation in case the story should get wind. when we got in, and had 
washed our feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, i 
tucked her into bed. before falling asleep she asked, even implored, 
me not to say a word to any one, even her mother, about her 
sleep-walking adventure. 
i hesitated at first, to promise, but on thinking of the state of her 
mother's health, and how the knowledge of such a thing would fret her, 
and think too, of how such a story might become distorted, nay, 
infallibly would, in case it should leak out, i thought it wiser to do 
so. i hope i did right. i have locked the door, and the key is tied 
to my wrist, so perhaps i shall not be again disturbed. lucy is 
sleeping soundly. the reflex of the dawn is high and far over the 
sea . . . 
same day, noon.-all goes well. lucy slept till i woke her and seemed 
not to have even changed her side. the adventure of the night does not 
seem to have harmed her, on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she 
looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. i was sorry to 
notice that my clumsiness with the safety-pin hurt her. indeed, it 
might have been serious, for the skin of her throat was pierced. i 
must have pinched up a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for 
there are two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the band of her 
nightdress was a drop of blood. when i apologised and was concerned 
about it, she laughed and petted me, and said she did not even feel it. 
fortunately it cannot leave a scar, as it is so tiny. 
same day, night.-we passed a happy day. the air was clear, and the 
sun bright, and there was a cool breeze. we took our lunch to mulgrave 
woods, mrs. westenra driving by the road and lucy and i walking by the 
cliff-path and joining her at the gate. i felt a little sad myself, 
for i could not but feel how absolutely happy it would have been had 
jonathan been with me. but there! i must only be patient. in the 
evening we strolled in the casino terrace, and heard some good music by 
spohr and mackenzie, and went to bed early. lucy seems more restful 
than she has been for some time, and fell asleep at once. i shall lock 
the door and secure the key the same as before, though i do not expect 
any trouble tonight. 
12 august.-my expectations were wrong, for twice during the night i 
was wakened by lucy trying to get out. she seemed, even in her sleep, 
to be a little impatient at finding the door shut, and went back to bed 
under a sort of protest. i woke with the dawn, and heard the birds 
chirping outside of the window. lucy woke, too, and i was glad to see, 
was even better than on the previous morning. all her old gaiety of 
manner seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in beside me 
and told me all about arthur. i told her how anxious i was about 
jonathan, and then she tried to comfort me. well, she succeeded 
somewhat, for, though sympathy can't alter facts, it can make them more 
bearable. 
13 august.-another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as 
before. again i awoke in the night, and found lucy sitting up in bed, 
still asleep, pointing to the window. i got up quietly, and pulling 
aside the blind, looked out. it was brilliant moonlight, and the soft 
effect of the light over the sea and sky, merged together in one great 
silent mystery, was beautiful beyond words. between me and the 
moonlight flitted a great bat, coming and going in great whirling 
circles. once or twice it came quite close, but was, i suppose, 
frightened at seeing me, and flitted away across the harbour towards 
the abbey. when i came back from the window lucy had lain down again, 
and was sleeping peacefully. she did not stir again all night. 
14 august.-on the east cliff, reading and writing all day. lucy seems 
to have become as much in love with the spot as i am, and it is hard to 
get her away from it when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or 
dinner. this afternoon she made a funny remark. we were coming home 
for dinner, and had come to the top of the steps up from the west pier 
and stopped to look at the view, as we generally do. the setting sun, 
low down in the sky, was just dropping behind kettleness. the red 
light was thrown over on the east cliff and the old abbey, and seemed 
to bathe everything in a beautiful rosy glow. we were silent for a 
while, and suddenly lucy murmured as if to herself . . . 
"his red eyes again! they are just the same." it was such an odd 
expression, coming apropos of nothing, that it quite startled me. i 
slewed round a little, so as to see lucy well without seeming to stare 
at her, and saw that she was in a half dreamy state, with an odd look 
on her face that i could not quite make out, so i said nothing, but 
followed her eyes. she appeared to be looking over at our own seat, 
whereon was a dark figure seated alone. i was quite a little startled 
myself, for it seemed for an instant as if the stranger had great eyes 
like burning flames, but a second look dispelled the illusion. the red 
sunlight was shining on the windows of st. mary's church behind our 
seat, and as the sun dipped there was just sufficient change in the 
refraction and reflection to make it appear as if the light moved. i 
called lucy's attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself 
with a start, but she looked sad all the same. it may have been that 
she was thinking of that terrible night up there. we never refer to 
it, so i said nothing, and we went home to dinner. lucy had a headache 
and went early to bed. i saw her asleep, and went out for a little 
stroll myself. 
i walked along the cliffs to the westward, and was full of sweet 
sadness, for i was thinking of jonathan. when coming home, it was then 
bright moonlight, so bright that, though the front of our part of the 
crescent was in shadow, everything could be well seen, i threw a glance 
up at our window, and saw lucy's head leaning out. i opened my 
handkerchief and waved it. she did not notice or make any movement 
whatever. just then, the moonlight crept round an angle of the 
building, and the light fell on the window. there distinctly was lucy 
with her head lying up against the side of the window sill and her eyes 
shut. she was fast asleep, and by her, seated on the window sill, was 
something that looked like a good-sized bird. i was afraid she might 
get a chill, so i ran upstairs, but as i came into the room she was 
moving back to her bed, fast asleep, and breathing heavily. she was 
holding her hand to her throat, as though to protect if from the cold. 
i did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly. i have taken care that 
the door is locked and the window securely fastened. 
she looks so sweet as she sleeps, but she is paler than is her wont, 
and there is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which i do not like. 
i fear she is fretting about something. i wish i could find out what it 
is. 
15 august.-rose later than usual. lucy was languid and tired, and 
slept on after we had been called. we had a happy surprise at 
breakfast. arthur's father is better, and wants the marriage to come 
off soon. lucy is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorry 
at once. later on in the day she told me the cause. she is grieved to 
lose lucy as her very own, but she is rejoiced that she is soon to have 
some one to protect her. poor dear, sweet lady! she confided to me 
that she has got her death warrant. she has not told lucy, and made me 
promise secrecy. her doctor told her that within a few months, at 
most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. at any time, even now, 
a sudden shock would be almost sure to kill her. ah, we were wise to 
keep from her the affair of the dreadful night of lucy's sleep-walking. 
17 august.-no diary for two whole days. i have not had the heart to 
write. some sort of shadowy pall seems to be coming over our 
happiness. no news from jonathan, and lucy seems to be growing weaker, 
whilst her mother's hours are numbering to a close. i do not 
understand lucy's fading away as she is doing. she eats well and 
sleeps well, and enjoys the fresh air, but all the time the roses in 
her cheeks are fading, and she gets weaker and more languid day by day. 
at night i hear her gasping as if for air. 
i keep the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but 
she gets up and walks about the room, and sits at the open window. 
last night i found her leaning out when i woke up, and when i tried to 
wake her i could not. 
she was in a faint. when i managed to restore her, she was weak as 
water, and cried silently between long, painful struggles for breath. 
when i asked her how she came to be at the window she shook her head 
and turned away. 
i trust her feeling ill may not be from that unlucky prick of the 
safety-pin. i looked at her throat just now as she lay asleep, and the 
tiny wounds seem not to have healed. they are still open, and, if 
anything, larger than before, and the edges of them are faintly white. 
they are like little white dots with red centres. unless they heal 
within a day or two, i shall insist on the doctor seeing about them. 
letter, samuel f. billington & son, solicitors whitby, 
to messrs. carter, paterson & co., london. 
17 august 
"dear sirs,-herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by great 
northern railway. same are to be delivered at carfax, near 
purfleet, immediately on receipt at goods station king's cross. the 
house is at present empty, but enclosed please find keys, all of 
which are labelled. 
"you will please deposit the boxes, fifty in number, which form the 
consignment, in the partially ruined building forming part of the 
house and marked 'a' on rough diagrams enclosed. your agent will 
easily recognize the locality, as it is the ancient chapel of the 
mansion. the goods leave by the train at 9:30 tonight, and will be 
due at king's cross at 4:30 tomorrow afternoon. as our client 
wishes the delivery made as soon as possible, we shall be obliged by 
your having teams ready at king's cross at the time named and 
forthwith conveying the goods to destination. in order to obviate 
any delays possible through any routine requirements as to payment 
in your departments, we enclose cheque herewith for ten pounds, 
receipt of which please acknowledge. should the charge be less than 
this amount, you can return balance, if greater, we shall at once 
send cheque for difference on hearing from you. you are to leave 
the keys on coming away in the main hall of the house, where the 
proprietor may get them on his entering the house by means of his 
duplicate key. 
"pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy 
in pressing you in all ways to use the utmost expedition. 
"we are, dear sirs, 
faithfully yours, 
samuel f. billington & son" 
letter, messrs. carter, paterson & co., london, 
to messrs. billington & son, whitby. 
21 august. 
"dear sirs,-we beg to acknowledge 10 pounds received and to return 
cheque of 1 pound, 17s, 9d, amount of overplus, as shown in 
receipted account herewith. goods are delivered in exact accordance 
with instructions, and keys left in parcel in main hall, as 
directed. 
"we are, dear sirs, 
yours respectfully, 
pro carter, paterson & co." 
mina murray's journal. 
18 august.-i am happy today, and write sitting on the seat in the 
churchyard. lucy is ever so much better. last night she slept well 
all night, and did not disturb me once. 
the roses seem coming back already to her cheeks, though she is still 
sadly pale and wan-looking. if she were in any way anemic i could 
understand it, but she is not. she is in gay spirits and full of life 
and cheerfulness. all the morbid reticence seems to have passed from 
her, and she has just reminded me, as if i needed any reminding, of 
that night, and that it was here, on this very seat, i found her 
asleep. 
as she told me she tapped playfully with the heel of her boot on the 
stone slab and said, 
"my poor little feet didn't make much noise then! i daresay poor old 
mr. swales would have told me that it was because i didn't want to wake 
up geordie." 
as she was in such a communicative humour, i asked her if she had 
dreamed at all that night. 
before she answered, that sweet, puckered look came into her forehead, 
which arthur, i call him arthur from her habit, says he loves, and 
indeed, i don't wonder that he does. then she went on in a 
half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to recall it to herself. 
"i didn't quite dream, but it all seemed to be real. i only wanted to 
be here in this spot. i don't know why, for i was afraid of something, 
i don't know what. i remember, though i suppose i was asleep, passing 
through the streets and over the bridge. a fish leaped as i went by, 
and i leaned over to look at it, and i heard a lot of dogs howling. the 
whole town seemed as if it must be full of dogs all howling at once, as 
i went up the steps. then i had a vague memory of something long and 
dark with red eyes, just as we saw in the sunset, and something very 
sweet and very bitter all around me at once. and then i seemed sinking 
into deep green water, and there was a singing in my ears, as i have 
heard there is to drowning men, and then everything seemed passing away 
from me. my soul seemed to go out from my body and float about the 
air. i seem to remember that once the west lighthouse was right under 
me, and then there was a sort of agonizing feeling, as if i were in an 
earthquake, and i came back and found you shaking my body. i saw you 
do it before i felt you." 
then she began to laugh. it seemed a little uncanny to me, and i 
listened to her breathlessly. i did not quite like it, and thought it 
better not to keep her mind on the subject, so we drifted on to another 
subject, and lucy was like her old self again. when we got home the 
fresh breeze had braced her up, and her pale cheeks were really more 
rosy. her mother rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very 
happy evening together. 
19 august.-joy, joy, joy! although not all joy. at last, news of 
jonathan. the dear fellow has been ill, that is why he did not write. 
i am not afraid to think it or to say it, now that i know. mr. hawkins 
sent me on the letter, and wrote himself, oh so kindly. i am to leave 
in the morning and go over to jonathan, and to help to nurse him if 
necessary, and to bring him home. mr. hawkins says it would not be a 
bad thing if we were to be married out there. i have cried over the 
good sister's letter till i can feel it wet against my bosom, where it 
lies. it is of jonathan, and must be near my heart, for he is in my 
heart. my journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. i am only 
taking one change of dress. lucy will bring my trunk to london and 
keep it till i send for it, for it may be that . . . i must write no 
more. i must keep it to say to jonathan, my husband. the letter that 
he has seen and touched must comfort me till we meet. 
letter, sister agatha, hospital of st. joseph and 
ste. mary buda-pesth, to miss willhelmina murray 
12 august, 
"dear madam. 
"i write by desire of mr. jonathan harker, who is himself not strong 
enough to write, though progressing well, thanks to god and st. 
joseph and ste. mary. he has been under our care for nearly six 
weeks, suffering from a violent brain fever. he wishes me to convey 
his love, and to say that by this post i write for him to mr. peter 
hawkins, exeter, to say, with his dutiful respects, that he is sorry 
for his delay, and that all of his work is completed. he will 
require some few weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but 
will then return. he wishes me to say that he has not sufficient 
money with him, and that he would like to pay for his staying here, 
so that others who need shall not be wanting for help. 
"believe me, 
"yours, with sympathy 
and all blessings. 
sister agatha 
"p.s.-my patient being asleep, i open this to let you know 
something more. he has told me all about you, and that you are 
shortly to be his wife. all blessings to you both! he has had some 
fearful shock, so says our doctor, and in his delirium his ravings 
have been dreadful, of wolves and poison and blood, of ghosts and 
demons, and i fear to say of what. be careful of him always that 
there may be nothing to excite him of this kind for a long time to 
come. the traces of such an illness as his do not lightly die away. 
we should have written long ago, but we knew nothing of his friends, 
and there was nothing on him, nothing that anyone could understand. 
he came in the train from klausenburg, and the guard was told by the 
station master there that he rushed into the station shouting for a 
ticket for home. seeing from his violent demeanour that he was 
english, they gave him a ticket for the furthest station on the way 
thither that the train reached. 
"be assured that he is well cared for. he has won all hearts by his 
sweetness and gentleness. he is truly getting on well, and i have 
no doubt will in a few weeks be all himself. but be careful of him 
for safety's sake. there are, i pray god and st. joseph and ste. 
mary, many, many, happy years for you both." 
dr. seward's diary 
19 august.-strange and sudden change in renfield last night. about 
eight o'clock he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog does 
when setting. the attendant was struck by his manner, and knowing my 
interest in him, encouraged him to talk. he is usually respectful to 
the attendant and at times servile, but tonight, the man tells me, he 
was quite haughty. would not condescend to talk with him at all. 
all he would say was, "i don't want to talk to you. you don't count 
now. the master is at hand." 
the attendant thinks it is some sudden form of religious mania which 
has seized him. if so, we must look out for squalls, for a strong man 
with homicidal and religious mania at once might be dangerous. the 
combination is a dreadful one. 
at nine o'clock i visited him myself. his attitude to me was the same 
as that to the attendant. in his sublime self-feeling the difference 
between myself and the attendant seemed to him as nothing. it looks 
like religious mania, and he will soon think that he himself is god. 
these infinitesimal distinctions between man and man are too paltry for 
an omnipotent being. how these madmen give themselves away! the real 
god taketh heed lest a sparrow fall. but the god created from human 
vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. oh, if men 
only knew! 
for half an hour or more renfield kept getting excited in greater and 
greater degree. i did not pretend to be watching him, but i kept 
strict observation all the same. all at once that shifty look came 
into his eyes which we always see when a madman has seized an idea, and 
with it the shifty movement of the head and back which asylum 
attendants come to know so well. he became quite quiet, and went and 
sat on the edge of his bed resignedly, and looked into space with 
lack-luster eyes. 
i thought i would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and 
tried to lead him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed 
to excite his attention. 
at first he made no reply, but at length said testily, "bother them 
all! i don't care a pin about them." 
"what?" i said. "you don't mean to tell me you don't care about 
spiders?" (spiders at present are his hobby and the notebook is filling 
up with columns of small figures.) 
to this he answered enigmatically, "the bride maidens rejoice the eyes 
that wait the coming of the bride. but when the bride draweth nigh, 
then the maidens shine not to the eyes that are filled." 
he would not explain himself, but remained obstinately seated on his 
bed all the time i remained with him. 
i am weary tonight and low in spirits. i cannot but think of lucy, and 
how different things might have been. if i don't sleep at once, 
chloral, the modern morpheus! i must be careful not to let it grow 
into a habit. no, i shall take none tonight! i have thought of lucy, 
and i shall not dishonour her by mixing the two. if need be, tonight 
shall be sleepless. 
later.-glad i made the resolution, gladder that i kept to it. i had 
lain tossing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the 
night watchman came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that renfield 
had escaped. i threw on my clothes and ran down at once. my patient 
is too dangerous a person to be roaming about. those ideas of his 
might work out dangerously with strangers. 
the attendant was waiting for me. he said he had seen him not ten 
minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had looked through 
the observation trap in the door. his attention was called by the 
sound of the window being wrenched out. he ran back and saw his feet 
disappear through the window, and had at once sent up for me. he was 
only in his night gear, and cannot be far off. 
the attendant thought it would be more useful to watch where he should 
go than to follow him, as he might lose sight of him whilst getting out 
of the building by the door. he is a bulky man, and couldn't get 
through the window. 
i am thin, so, with his aid, i got out, but feet foremost, and as we 
were only a few feet above ground landed unhurt. 
the attendant told me the patient had gone to the left, and had taken a 
straight line, so i ran as quickly as i could. as i got through the 
belt of trees i saw a white figure scale the high wall which separates 
our grounds from those of the deserted house. 
i ran back at once, told the watchman to get three or four men 
immediately and follow me into the grounds of carfax, in case our 
friend might be dangerous. i got a ladder myself, and crossing the 
wall, dropped down on the other side. i could see renfield's figure 
just disappearing behind the angle of the house, so i ran after him. on 
the far side of the house i found him pressed close against the old 
iron-bound oak door of the chapel. 
he was talking, apparently to some one, but i was afraid to go near 
enough to hear what he was saying, lest i might frighten him, and he 
should run off. 
chasing an errant swarm of bees is nothing to following a naked 
lunatic, when the fit of escaping is upon him! after a few minutes, 
however, i could see that he did not take note of anything around him, 
and so ventured to draw nearer to him, the more so as my men had now 
crossed the wall and were closing him in. i heard him say . . . 
"i am here to do your bidding, master. i am your slave, and you will 
reward me, for i shall be faithful. i have worshipped you long and afar 
off. now that you are near, i await your commands, and you will not 
pass me by, will you, dear master, in your distribution of good 
things?" 
he is a selfish old beggar anyhow. he thinks of the loaves and fishes 
even when he believes his is in a real presence. his manias make a 
startling combination. when we closed in on him he fought like a 
tiger. he is immensely strong, for he was more like a wild beast than 
a man. 
i never saw a lunatic in such a paroxysm of rage before, and i hope i 
shall not again. it is a mercy that we have found out his strength and 
his danger in good time. with strength and determination like his, he 
might have done wild work before he was caged. 
he is safe now, at any rate. jack sheppard himself couldn't get free 
from the strait waistcoat that keeps him restrained, and he's chained 
to the wall in the padded room. 
his cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are more 
deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement. 
just now he spoke coherent words for the first time. "i shall be 
patient, master. it is coming, coming, coming!" 
so i took the hint, and came too. i was too excited to sleep, but this 
diary has quieted me, and i feel i shall get some sleep tonight. 
chapter 9 
letter, mina harker to lucy westenra 
buda-pesth, 24 august. 
"my dearest lucy, 
"i know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened 
since we parted at the railway station at whitby. 
"well, my dear, i got to hull all right, and caught the boat to 
hamburg, and then the train on here. i feel that i can hardly 
recall anything of the journey, except that i knew i was coming to 
jonathan, and that as i should have to do some nursing, i had better 
get all the sleep i could. i found my dear one, oh, so thin and 
pale and weak-looking. all the resolution has gone out of his dear 
eyes, and that quiet dignity which i told you was in his face has 
vanished. he is only a wreck of himself, and he does not remember 
anything that has happened to him for a long time past. at least, 
he wants me to believe so, and i shall never ask. 
"he has had some terrible shock, and i fear it might tax his poor 
brain if he were to try to recall it. sister agatha, who is a good 
creature and a born nurse, tells me that he wanted her to tell me 
what they were, but she would only cross herself, and say she would 
never tell. that the ravings of the sick were the secrets of god, 
and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she 
should respect her trust. 
"she is a sweet, good soul, and the next day, when she saw i was 
troubled, she opened up the subject my poor dear raved about, added, 
'i can tell you this much, my dear. that it was not about anything 
which he has done wrong himself, and you, as his wife to be, have no 
cause to be concerned. he has not forgotten you or what he owes to 
you. his fear was of great and terrible things, which no mortal can 
treat of.' 
"i do believe the dear soul thought i might be jealous lest my poor 
dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. the idea of my 
being jealous about jonathan! and yet, my dear, let me whisper, i 
felt a thrill of joy through me when i knew that no other woman was 
a cause for trouble. i am now sitting by his bedside, where i can 
see his face while he sleeps. he is waking! 
"when he woke he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to get 
something from the pocket. i asked sister agatha, and she brought 
all his things. i saw amongst them was his notebook, and was 
going to ask him to let me look at it, for i knew that i might find 
some clue to his trouble, but i suppose he must have seen my wish in 
my eyes, for he sent me over to the window, saying he wanted to be 
quite alone for a moment. 
"then he called me back, and he said to me very solemnly, 
'wilhelmina', i knew then that he was in deadly earnest, for he has 
never called me by that name since he asked me to marry him, 'you 
know, dear, my ideas of the trust between husband and wife. there 
should be no secret, no concealment. i have had a great shock, and 
when i try to think of what it is i feel my head spin round, and i 
do not know if it was real of the dreaming of a madman. you know i 
had brain fever, and that is to be mad. the secret is here, and i 
do not want to know it. i want to take up my life here, with our 
marriage.' for, my dear, we had decided to be married as soon as 
the formalities are complete. 'are you willing, wilhelmina, to 
share my ignorance? here is the book. take it and keep it, read it 
if you will, but never let me know unless, indeed, some solemn duty 
should come upon me to go back to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, 
sane or mad, recorded here.' he fell back exhausted, and i put the 
book under his pillow, and kissed him. i have asked sister agatha 
to beg the superior to let our wedding be this afternoon, and am 
waiting her reply . . ." 
"she has come and told me that the chaplain of the english mission 
church has been sent for. we are to be married in an hour, or as 
soon after as jonathan awakes." 
"lucy, the time has come and gone. i feel very solemn, but very, 
very happy. jonathan woke a little after the hour, and all was 
ready, and he sat up in bed, propped up with pillows. he answered 
his 'i will' firmly and strong. i could hardly speak. my heart was 
so full that even those words seemed to choke me. 
"the dear sisters were so kind. please, god, i shall never, never 
forget them, nor the grave and sweet responsibilities i have taken 
upon me. i must tell you of my wedding present. when the chaplain 
and the sisters had left me alone with my husband-oh, lucy, it is 
the first time i have written the words 'my husband'-left me alone 
with my husband, i took the book from under his pillow, and wrapped 
it up in white paper, and tied it with a little bit of pale blue 
ribbon which was round my neck, and sealed it over the knot with 
sealing wax, and for my seal i used my wedding ring. then i kissed 
it and showed it to my husband, and told him that i would keep it 
so, and then it would be an outward and visible sign for us all our 
lives that we trusted each other, that i would never open it unless 
it were for his own dear sake or for the sake of some stern duty. 
then he took my hand in his, and oh, lucy, it was the first time he 
took his wife's hand, and said that it was the dearest thing in all 
the wide world, and that he would go through all the past again to 
win it, if need be. the poor dear meant to have said a part of the 
past, but he cannot think of time yet, and i shall not wonder if at 
first he mixes up not only the month, but the year. 
"well, my dear, what could i say? i could only tell him that i was 
the happiest woman in all the wide world, and that i had nothing to 
give him except myself, my life, and my trust, and that with these 
went my love and duty for all the days of my life. and, my dear, 
when he kissed me, and drew me to him with his poor weak hands, it 
was like a solemn pledge between us. 
"lucy dear, do you know why i tell you all this? it is not only 
because it is all sweet to me, but because you have been, and are, 
very dear to me. it was my privilege to be your friend and guide 
when you came from the schoolroom to prepare for the world of life. 
i want you to see now, and with the eyes of a very happy wife, 
whither duty has led me, so that in your own married life you too 
may be all happy, as i am. my dear, please almighty god, your life 
may be all it promises, a long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, 
no forgetting duty, no distrust. i must not wish you no pain, for 
that can never be, but i do hope you will be always as happy as i am 
now. goodbye, my dear. i shall post this at once, and perhaps, 
write you very soon again. i must stop, for jonathan is waking. i 
must attend my husband! 
"your ever-loving 
mina harker." 
letter, lucy westenra to mina harker. 
whitby, 30 august. 
"my dearest mina, 
"oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your 
own home with your husband. i wish you were coming home soon enough 
to stay with us here. the strong air would soon restore jonathan. 
it has quite restored me. i have an appetite like a cormorant, am 
full of life, and sleep well. you will be glad to know that i have 
quite given up walking in my sleep. i think i have not stirred out 
of my bed for a week, that is when i once got into it at night. 
arthur says i am getting fat. by the way, i forgot to tell you that 
arthur is here. we have such walks and drives, and rides, and 
rowing, and tennis, and fishing together, and i love him more than 
ever. he tells me that he loves me more, but i doubt that, for at 
first he told me that he couldn't love me more than he did then. 
but this is nonsense. there he is, calling to me. so no more just 
at present from your loving, 
"lucy. 
"p.s.-mother sends her love. she seems better, poor dear. 
"p.p.s.-we are to be married on 28 september." 
dr. sewards diary 
20 august.-the case of renfield grows even more interesting. he has 
now so far quieted that there are spells of cessation from his 
passion. for the first week after his attack he was perpetually 
violent. then one night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and 
kept murmuring to himself. "now i can wait. now i can wait." 
the attendant came to tell me, so i ran down at once to have a look at 
him. he was still in the strait waistcoat and in the padded room, but 
the suffused look had gone from his face, and his eyes had something 
of their old pleading. i might almost say, cringing, softness. i was 
satisfied with his present condition, and directed him to be relieved. 
the attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without 
protest. 
it was a strange thing that the patient had humour enough to see their 
distrust, for, coming close to me, he said in a whisper, all the while 
looking furtively at them, "they think i could hurt you! fancy me 
hurting you! the fools!" 
it was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find myself disassociated 
even in the mind of this poor madman from the others, but all the same 
i do not follow his thought. am i to take it that i have anything in 
common with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand together. or 
has he to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well being is 
needful to him? i must find out later on. tonight he will not speak. 
even the offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt 
him. 
he will only say, "i don't take any stock in cats. i have more to 
think of now, and i can wait. i can wait." 
after a while i left him. the attendant tells me that he was quiet 
until just before dawn, and that then he began to get uneasy, and at 
length violent, until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhausted 
him so that he swooned into a sort of coma. 
. . . three nights has the same thing happened, violent all day then 
quiet from moonrise to sunrise. i wish i could get some clue to the 
cause. it would almost seem as if there was some influence which came 
and went. happy thought! we shall tonight play sane wits against mad 
ones. he escaped before without our help. tonight he shall escape 
with it. we shall give him a chance, and have the men ready to follow 
in case they are required. 
23 august.-"the expected always happens." how well disraeli knew 
life. our bird when he found the cage open would not fly, so all our 
subtle arrangements were for nought. at any rate, we have proved one 
thing, that the spells of quietness last a reasonable time. we shall 
in future be able to ease his bonds for a few hours each day. i have 
given orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the padded 
room, when once he is quiet, until the hour before sunrise. the poor 
soul's body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate 
it. hark! the unexpected again! i am called. the patient has once 
more escaped. 
later.-another night adventure. renfield artfully waited until the 
attendant was entering the room to inspect. then he dashed out past 
him and flew down the passage. i sent word for the attendants to 
follow. again he went into the grounds of the deserted house, and we 
found him in the same place, pressed against the old chapel door. 
when he saw me he became furious, and had not the attendants seized 
him in time, he would have tried to kill me. as we were holding him a 
strange thing happened. he suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then 
as suddenly grew calm. i looked round instinctively, but could see 
nothing. then i caught the patient's eye and followed it, but could 
trace nothing as it looked into the moonlight sky, except a big bat, 
which was flapping its silent and ghostly way to the west. bats 
usually wheel about, but this one seemed to go straight on, as if it 
knew where it was bound for or had some intention of its own. 
the patient grew calmer every instant, and presently said, "you 
needn't tie me. i shall go quietly!" without trouble, we came back 
to the house. i feel there is something ominous in his calm, and 
shall not forget this night. 
lucy westenra's diary 
hillingham, 24 august.-i must imitate mina, and keep writing things 
down. then we can have long talks when we do meet. i wonder when it 
will be. i wish she were with me again, for i feel so unhappy. last 
night i seemed to be dreaming again just as i was at whitby. perhaps 
it is the change of air, or getting home again. it is all dark and 
horrid to me, for i can remember nothing. but i am full of vague 
fear, and i feel so weak and worn out. when arthur came to lunch he 
looked quite grieved when he saw me, and i hadn't the spirit to try to 
be cheerful. i wonder if i could sleep in mother's room tonight. i 
shall make an excuse to try. 
25 august.-another bad night. mother did not seem to take to my 
proposal. she seems not too well herself, and doubtless she fears to 
worry me. i tried to keep awake, and succeeded for a while, but when 
the clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze, so i must have been 
falling asleep. there was a sort of scratching or flapping at the 
window, but i did not mind it, and as i remember no more, i suppose i 
must have fallen asleep. more bad dreams. i wish i could remember 
them. this morning i am horribly weak. my face is ghastly pale, and 
my throat pains me. it must be something wrong with my lungs, for i 
don't seem to be getting air enough. i shall try to cheer up when 
arthur comes, or else i know he will be miserable to see me so. 
letter, arthur to dr. seward 
"albemarle hotel, 31 august 
"my dear jack, 
"i want you to do me a favour. lucy is ill, that is she has no 
special disease, but she looks awful, and is getting worse every 
day. i have asked her if there is any cause, i not dare to ask her 
mother, for to disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in 
her present state of health would be fatal. mrs. westenra has 
confided to me that her doom is spoken, disease of the heart, though 
poor lucy does not know it yet. i am sure that there is something 
preying on my dear girl's mind. i am almost distracted when i think 
of her. to look at her gives me a pang. i told her i should ask 
you to see her, and though she demurred at first, i know why, old 
fellow, she finally consented. it will be a painful task for you, i 
know, old friend, but it is for her sake, and i must not hesitate to 
ask, or you to act. you are to come to lunch at hillingham 
tomorrow, two o'clock, so as not to arouse any suspicion in mrs. 
westenra, and after lunch lucy will take an opportunity of being 
alone with you. i am filled with anxiety, and want to consult with 
you alone as soon as i can after you have seen her. do not fail! 
"arthur." 
telegram, arthur holmwood to seward 
1 september 
"am summoned to see my father, who is worse. am writing. write 
me fully by tonight's post to ring. wire me if necessary." 
letter from dr. seward to arthur holmwood 
2 september 
"my dear old fellow, 
"with regard to miss westenra's health i hasten to let you know at 
once that in my opinion there is not any functional disturbance or 
any malady that i know of. at the same time, i am not by any means 
satisfied with her appearance. she is woefully different from what 
she was when i saw her last. of course you must bear in mind that i 
did not have full opportunity of examination such as i should wish. 
our very friendship makes a little difficulty which not even medical 
science or custom can bridge over. i had better tell you exactly 
what happened, leaving you to draw, in a measure, your own 
conclusions. i shall then say what i have done and propose doing. 
"i found miss westenra in seemingly gay spirits. her mother was 
present, and in a few seconds i made up my mind that she was trying 
all she knew to mislead her mother and prevent her from being 
anxious. i have no doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what 
need of caution there is. 
"we lunched alone, and as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful, 
we got, as some kind of reward for our labours, some real 
cheerfulness amongst us. then mrs. westenra went to lie down, and 
lucy was left with me. we went into her boudoir, and till we got 
there her gaiety remained, for the servants were coming and going. 
"as soon as the door was closed, however, the mask fell from her 
face, and she sank down into a chair with a great sigh, and hid her 
eyes with her hand. when i saw that her high spirits had failed, i 
at once took advantage of her reaction to make a diagnosis. 
"she said to me very sweetly, 'i cannot tell you how i loathe 
talking about myself.' i reminded her that a doctor's confidence 
was sacred, but that you were grievously anxious about her. she 
caught on to my meaning at once, and settled that matter in a word. 
'tell arthur everything you choose. i do not care for myself, but 
for him!' so i am quite free. 
"i could easily see that she was somewhat bloodless, but i could not 
see the usual anemic signs, and by the chance, i was able to test 
the actual quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was 
stiff a cord gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken 
glass. it was a slight matter in itself, but it gave me an evident 
chance, and i secured a few drops of the blood and have analysed 
them. 
"the qualitative analysis give a quite normal condition, and shows, 
i should infer, in itself a vigorous state of health. in other 
physical matters i was quite satisfied that there is no need for 
anxiety, but as there must be a cause somewhere, i have come to the 
conclusion that it must be something mental. 
"she complains of difficulty breathing satisfactorily at times, and 
of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but 
regarding which she can remember nothing. she says that as a child, 
she used to walk in her sleep, and that when in whitby the habit 
came back, and that once she walked out in the night and went to 
east cliff, where miss murray found her. but she assures me that of 
late the habit has not returned. 
"i am in doubt, and so have done the best thing i know of. i have 
written to my old friend and master, professor van helsing, of 
amsterdam, who knows as much about obscure diseases as any one in 
the world. i have asked him to come over, and as you told me that 
all things were to be at your charge, i have mentioned to him who 
you are and your relations to miss westenra. this, my dear fellow, 
is in obedience to your wishes, for i am only too proud and happy to 
do anything i can for her. 
"van helsing would, i know, do anything for me for a personal 
reason, so no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept his 
wishes. he is a seemingly arbitrary man, this is because he knows 
what he is talking about better than any one else. he is a 
philosopher and a metaphysician, and one of the most advanced 
scientists of his day, and he has, i believe, an absolutely open 
mind. this, with an iron nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, and 
indomitable resolution, self-command, and toleration exalted from 
virtues to blessings, and the kindliest and truest heart that beats, 
these form his equipment for the noble work that he is doing for 
mankind, work both in theory and practice, for his views are as wide 
as his all-embracing sympathy. i tell you these facts that you may 
know why i have such confidence in him. i have asked him to come at 
once. i shall see miss westenra tomorrow again. she is to meet me 
at the stores, so that i may not alarm her mother by too early a 
repetition of my call. 
"yours always." 
john seward 
letter, abraham van helsing, md, dph, d. lit, etc, etc, to dr. seward 
2 september. 
"my good friend, 
"when i received your letter i am already coming to you. by good 
fortune i can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who 
have trusted me. were fortune other, then it were bad for those who 
have trusted, for i come to my friend when he call me to aid those 
he holds dear. tell your friend that when that time you suck from 
my wound so swiftly the poison of the gangrene from that knife that 
our other friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when 
he wants my aids and you call for them than all his great fortune 
could do. but it is pleasure added to do for him, your friend, it 
is to you that i come. have near at hand, and please it so arrange 
that we may see the young lady not too late on tomorrow, for it is 
likely that i may have to return here that night. but if need be i 
shall come again in three days, and stay longer if it must. till 
then goodbye, my friend john. 
"van helsing." 
letter, dr. seward to hon. arthur holmwood 
3 september 
"my dear art, 
"van helsing has come and gone. he came on with me to hillingham, 
and found that, by lucy's discretion, her mother was lunching out, 
so that we were alone with her. 
"van helsing made a very careful examination of the patient. he is 
to report to me, and i shall advise you, for of course i was not 
present all the time. he is, i fear, much concerned, but says he 
must think. when i told him of our friendship and how you trust to 
me in the matter, he said, 'you must tell him all you think. tell 
him what i think, if you can guess it, if you will. nay, i am 
not jesting. this is no jest, but life and death, perhaps more.' i 
asked what he meant by that, for he was very serious. this was when 
we had come back to town, and he was having a cup of tea before 
starting on his return to amsterdam. he would not give me any 
further clue. you must not be angry with me, art, because his very 
reticence means that all his brains are working for her good. he 
will speak plainly enough when the time comes, be sure. so i told 
him i would simply write an account of our visit, just as if i were 
doing a descriptive special article for the daily telegraph. he 
seemed not to notice, but remarked that the smuts of london were not 
quite so bad as they used to be when he was a student here. i am to 
get his report tomorrow if he can possibly make it. in any case i 
am to have a letter. 
"well, as to the visit, lucy was more cheerful than on the day i 
first saw her, and certainly looked better. she had lost something 
of the ghastly look that so upset you, and her breathing was normal. 
she was very sweet to the professor (as she always is), and tried to 
make him feel at ease, though i could see the poor girl was making a 
hard struggle for it. 
"i believe van helsing saw it, too, for i saw the quick look 
under his bushy brows that i knew of old. then he began to 
chat of all things except ourselves and diseases and with 
such an infinite geniality that i could see poor lucy's 
pretense of animation merge into reality. then, without 
any seeming change, he brought the conversation gently round 
to his visit, and suavely said, 
"'my dear young miss, i have the so great pleasure because you are 
so much beloved. that is much, my dear, even were there that which 
i do not see. they told me you were down in the spirit, and that 
you were of a ghastly pale. to them i say "pouf!"' and he snapped 
his fingers at me and went on. 'but you and i shall show them how 
wrong they are. how can he,' and he pointed at me with the same 
look and gesture as that with which he pointed me out in his class, 
on, or rather after, a particular occasion which he never fails to 
remind me of, 'know anything of a young ladies? he has his madmen 
to play with, and to bring them back to happiness, and to those that 
love them. it is much to do, and, oh, but there are rewards in that 
we can bestow such happiness. but the young ladies! he has no wife 
nor daughter, and the young do not tell themselves to the young, but 
to the old, like me, who have known so many sorrows and the causes 
of them. so, my dear, we will send him away to smoke the cigarette 
in the garden, whiles you and i have little talk all to ourselves.' 
i took the hint, and strolled about, and presently the professor 
came to the window and called me in. he looked grave, but said, 'i 
have made careful examination, but there is no functional cause. 
with you i agree that there has been much blood lost, it has been 
but is not. but the conditions of her are in no way anemic. i have 
asked her to send me her maid, that i may ask just one or two 
questions, that so i may not chance to miss nothing. i know well 
what she will say. and yet there is cause. there is always cause 
for everything. i must go back home and think. you must send me 
the telegram every day, and if there be cause i shall come again. 
the disease, for not to be well is a disease, interest me, and the 
sweet, young dear, she interest me too. she charm me, and for her, 
if not for you or disease, i come.' 
"as i tell you, he would not say a word more, even when we were 
alone. and so now, art, you know all i know. i shall keep stern 
watch. i trust your poor father is rallying. it must be a terrible 
thing to you, my dear old fellow, to be placed in such a position 
between two people who are both so dear to you. i know your idea of 
duty to your father, and you are right to stick to it. but if need 
be, i shall send you word to come at once to lucy, so do not be 
over-anxious unless you hear from me." 
dr. seward's diary 
4 september.-zoophagous patient still keeps up our interest in him. 
he had only one outburst and that was yesterday at an unusual time. 
just before the stroke of noon he began to grow restless. the 
attendant knew the symptoms, and at once summoned aid. fortunately 
the men came at a run, and were just in time, for at the stroke of 
noon he became so violent that it took all their strength to hold him. 
in about five minutes, however, he began to get more quiet, and 
finally sank into a sort of melancholy, in which state he has remained 
up to now. the attendant tells me that his screams whilst in the 
paroxysm were really appalling. i found my hands full when i got in, 
attending to some of the other patients who were frightened by him. 
indeed, i can quite understand the effect, for the sounds disturbed 
even me, though i was some distance away. it is now after the dinner 
hour of the asylum, and as yet my patient sits in a corner brooding, 
with a dull, sullen, woe-begone look in his face, which seems rather 
to indicate than to show something directly. i cannot quite 
understand it. 
later.-another change in my patient. at five o'clock i looked in on 
him, and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used to be. 
he was catching flies and eating them, and was keeping note of his 
capture by making nailmarks on the edge of the door between the ridges 
of padding. when he saw me, he came over and apologized for his bad 
conduct, and asked me in a very humble, cringing way to be led back to 
his own room, and to have his notebook again. i thought it well to 
humour him, so he is back in his room with the window open. he has 
the sugar of his tea spread out on the window sill, and is reaping 
quite a harvest of flies. he is not now eating them, but putting them 
into a box, as of old, and is already examining the corners of his 
room to find a spider. i tried to get him to talk about the past few 
days, for any clue to his thoughts would be of immense help to me, but 
he would not rise. for a moment or two he looked very sad, and said 
in a sort of far away voice, as though saying it rather to himself 
than to me. 
"all over! all over! he has deserted me. no hope for me now unless 
i do it myself!" then suddenly turning to me in a resolute way, he 
said, "doctor, won't you be very good to me and let me have a little 
more sugar? i think it would be very good for me." 
"and the flies?" i said. 
"yes! the flies like it, too, and i like the flies, therefore i like 
it." and there are people who know so little as to think that madmen do 
not argue. i procured him a double supply, and left him as happy a 
man as, i suppose, any in the world. i wish i could fathom his mind. 
midnight.-another change in him. i had been to see miss westenra, 
whom i found much better, and had just returned, and was standing at 
our own gate looking at the sunset, when once more i heard him 
yelling. as his room is on this side of the house, i could hear it 
better than in the morning. it was a shock to me to turn from the 
wonderful smoky beauty of a sunset over london, with its lurid lights 
and inky shadows and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds 
even as on foul water, and to realize all the grim sternness of my own 
cold stone building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own 
desolate heart to endure it all. i reached him just as the sun was 
going down, and from his window saw the red disc sink. as it sank he 
became less and less frenzied, and just as it dipped he slid from the 
hands that held him, an inert mass, on the floor. it is wonderful, 
however, what intellectual recuperative power lunatics have, for 
within a few minutes he stood up quite calmly and looked around him. i 
signalled to the attendants not to hold him, for i was anxious to see 
what he would do. he went straight over to the window and brushed out 
the crumbs of sugar. then he took his fly box, and emptied it 
outside, and threw away the box. then he shut the window, and 
crossing over, sat down on his bed. all this surprised me, so i asked 
him, "are you going to keep flies any more?" 
"no," said he. "i am sick of all that rubbish!" he certainly is a 
wonderfully interesting study. i wish i could get some glimpse of his 
mind or of the cause of his sudden passion. stop. there may be a 
clue after all, if we can find why today his paroxysms came on at high 
noon and at sunset. can it be that there is a malign influence of the 
sun at periods which affects certain natures, as at times the moon 
does others? we shall see. 
telegram. seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam 
"4 september.-patient still better today." 
telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam 
"5 september.-patient greatly improved. good appetite, sleeps 
naturally, good spirits, colour coming back." 
telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam 
"6 september.-terrible change for the worse. come at once. 
do not lose an hour. i hold over telegram to holmwood till 
have seen you." 
chapter 10 
letter, dr. seward to hon. arthur holmwood 
6 september 
"my dear art, 
"my news today is not so good. lucy this morning had gone back a 
bit. there is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it. 
mrs. westenra was naturally anxious concerning lucy, and has 
consulted me professionally about her. i took advantage of the 
opportunity, and told her that my old master, van helsing, the great 
specialist, was coming to stay with me, and that i would put her in 
his charge conjointly with myself. so now we can come and go 
without alarming her unduly, for a shock to her would mean sudden 
death, and this, in lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to 
her. we are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor fellow, 
but, please god, we shall come through them all right. if any need 
i shall write, so that, if you do not hear from me, take it for 
granted that i am simply waiting for news, in haste, 
"yours ever," 
john seward 
dr. seward's diary 
7 september.-the first thing van helsing said to me when we met at 
liverpool street was, "have you said anything to our young friend, to 
lover of her?" 
"no," i said. "i waited till i had seen you, as i said in my 
telegram. i wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were 
coming, as miss westenra was not so well, and that i should let him 
know if need be." 
"right, my friend," he said. "quite right! better he not know as 
yet. perhaps he will never know. i pray so, but if it be needed, 
then he shall know all. and, my good friend john, let me caution you. 
you deal with the madmen. all men are mad in some way or the other, 
and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with 
god's madmen too, the rest of the world. you tell not your madmen 
what you do nor why you do it. you tell them not what you think. so 
you shall keep knowledge in its place, where it may rest, where it may 
gather its kind around it and breed. you and i shall keep as yet what 
we know here, and here." he touched me on the heart and on the 
forehead, and then touched himself the same way. "i have for myself 
thoughts at the present. later i shall unfold to you." 
"why not now?" i asked. "it may do some good. we may arrive at some 
decision." he looked at me and said, "my friend john, when the corn is 
grown, even before it has ripened, while the milk of its mother earth 
is in him, and the sunshine has not yet begun to paint him with his 
gold, the husbandman he pull the ear and rub him between his rough 
hands, and blow away the green chaff, and say to you, 'look! he's 
good corn, he will make a good crop when the time comes.'" 
i did not see the application and told him so. for reply he reached 
over and took my ear in his hand and pulled it playfully, as he used 
long ago to do at lectures, and said, "the good husbandman tell you so 
then because he knows, but not till then. but you do not find the 
good husbandman dig up his planted corn to see if he grow. that is 
for the children who play at husbandry, and not for those who take it 
as of the work of their life. see you now, friend john? i have sown 
my corn, and nature has her work to do in making it sprout, if he 
sprout at all, there's some promise, and i wait till the ear begins to 
swell." he broke off, for he evidently saw that i understood. then he 
went on gravely, "you were always a careful student, and your case 
book was ever more full than the rest. and i trust that good habit 
have not fail. remember, my friend, that knowledge is stronger than 
memory, and we should not trust the weaker. even if you have not kept 
the good practice, let me tell you that this case of our dear miss is 
one that may be, mind, i say may be, of such interest to us and others 
that all the rest may not make him kick the beam, as your people say. 
take then good note of it. nothing is too small. i counsel you, put 
down in record even your doubts and surmises. hereafter it may be of 
interest to you to see how true you guess. we learn from failure, not 
from success!" 
when i described lucy's symptoms, the same as before, but infinitely 
more marked, he looked very grave, but said nothing. he took with him 
a bag in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly 
paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of 
his lectures, the equipment of a professor of the healing craft. 
when we were shown in, mrs. westenra met us. she was alarmed, but not 
nearly so much as i expected to find her. nature in one of her 
beneficient moods has ordained that even death has some antidote to 
its own terrors. here, in a case where any shock may prove fatal, 
matters are so ordered that, from some cause or other, the things not 
personal, even the terrible change in her daughter to whom she is so 
attached, do not seem to reach her. it is something like the way dame 
nature gathers round a foreign body an envelope of some insensitive 
tissue which can protect from evil that which it would otherwise harm 
by contact. if this be an ordered selfishness, then we should pause 
before we condemn any one for the vice of egoism, for there may be 
deeper root for its causes than we have knowledge of. 
i used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and set down 
a rule that she should not be present with lucy, or think of her 
illness more than was absolutely required. she assented readily, so 
readily that i saw again the hand of nature fighting for life. van 
helsing and i were shown up to lucy's room. if i was shocked when i 
saw her yesterday, i was horrified when i saw her today. 
she was ghastly, chalkily pale. the red seemed to have gone even from 
her lips and gums, and the bones of her face stood out prominently. 
her breathing was painful to see or hear. van helsing's face grew set 
as marble, and his eyebrows converged till they almost touched over his 
nose. lucy lay motionless, and did not seem to have strength to 
speak, so for a while we were all silent. then van helsing beckoned 
to me, and we went gently out of the room. the instant we had closed 
the door he stepped quickly along the passage to the next door, which 
was open. then he pulled me quickly in with him and closed the door. 
"my god!" he said. "this is dreadful. there is not time to be lost. 
she will die for sheer want of blood to keep the heart's action as it 
should be. there must be a transfusion of blood at once. is it you 
or me?" 
"i am younger and stronger, professor. it must be me." 
"then get ready at once. i will bring up my bag. i am prepared." 
i went downstairs with him, and as we were going there was a knock at 
the hall door. when we reached the hall, the maid had just opened the 
door, and arthur was stepping quickly in. he rushed up to me, saying 
in an eager whisper, 
"jack, i was so anxious. i read between the lines of your letter, and 
have been in an agony. the dad was better, so i ran down here to see 
for myself. is not that gentleman dr. van helsing? i am so thankful 
to you, sir, for coming." 
when first the professor's eye had lit upon him, he had been angry at 
his interruption at such a time, but now, as he took in his stalwart 
proportions and recognized the strong young manhood which seemed to 
emanate from him, his eyes gleamed. without a pause he said to him as 
he held out his hand, 
"sir, you have come in time. you are the lover of our dear miss. she 
is bad, very, very bad. nay, my child, do not go like that." for he 
suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting. "you are 
to help her. you can do more than any that live, and your courage is 
your best help." 
"what can i do?" asked arthur hoarsely. "tell me, and i shall do it. 
my life is hers, and i would give the last drop of blood in my body for 
her." 
the professor has a strongly humorous side, and i could from old 
knowledge detect a trace of its origin in his answer. 
"my young sir, i do not ask so much as that, not the last!" 
"what shall i do?" there was fire in his eyes, and his open nostrils 
quivered with intent. van helsing slapped him on the shoulder. 
"come!" he said. "you are a man, and it is a man we want. you are 
better than me, better than my friend john." arthur looked bewildered, 
and the professor went on by explaining in a kindly way. 
"young miss is bad, very bad. she wants blood, and blood she must 
have or die. my friend john and i have consulted, and we are about to 
perform what we call transfusion of blood, to transfer from full veins 
of one to the empty veins which pine for him. john was to give his 
blood, as he is the more young and strong than me."-here arthur took 
my hand and wrung it hard in silence.-"but now you are here, you are 
more good than us, old or young, who toil much in the world of 
thought. our nerves are not so calm and our blood so bright than 
yours!" 
arthur turned to him and said, "if you only knew how gladly i would 
die for her you would understand . . ." he stopped with a sort of 
choke in his voice. 
"good boy!" said van helsing. "in the not-so-far-off you will be 
happy that you have done all for her you love. come now and be 
silent. you shall kiss her once before it is done, but then you must 
go, and you must leave at my sign. say no word to madame. you know 
how it is with her. there must be no shock, any knowledge of this 
would be one. come!" 
we all went up to lucy's room. arthur by direction remained outside. 
lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing. she was not 
asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the effort. her eyes 
spoke to us, that was all. 
van helsing took some things from his bag and laid them on a little 
table out of sight. then he mixed a narcotic, and coming over to the 
bed, said cheerily, "now, little miss, here is your medicine. drink 
it off, like a good child. see, i lift you so that to swallow is 
easy. yes." she had made the effort with success. 
it astonished me how long the drug took to act. this, in fact, marked 
the extent of her weakness. the time seemed endless until sleep began 
to flicker in her eyelids. at last, however, the narcotic began to 
manifest its potency, and she fell into a deep sleep. when the 
professor was satisfied, he called arthur into the room, and bade him 
strip off his coat. then he added, "you may take that one little kiss 
whiles i bring over the table. friend john, help to me!" so neither 
of us looked whilst he bent over her. 
van helsing, turning to me, said, "he is so young and strong, and of 
blood so pure that we need not defibrinate it." 
then with swiftness, but with absolute method, van helsing performed 
the operation. as the transfusion went on, something like life seemed 
to come back to poor lucy's cheeks, and through arthur's growing 
pallor the joy of his face seemed absolutely to shine. after a bit i 
began to grow anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on arthur, 
strong man as he was. it gave me an idea of what a terrible strain 
lucy's system must have undergone that what weakened arthur only 
partially restored her. 
but the professor's face was set, and he stood watch in hand, and with 
his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on arthur. i could hear my 
own heart beat. presently, he said in a soft voice, "do not stir an 
instant. it is enough. you attend him. i will look to her." 
when all was over, i could see how much arthur was weakened. i 
dressed the wound and took his arm to bring him away, when van helsing 
spoke without turning round, the man seems to have eyes in the back of 
his head, "the brave lover, i think, deserve another kiss, which he 
shall have presently." and as he had now finished his operation, he 
adjusted the pillow to the patient's head. as he did so the narrow 
black velvet band which she seems always to wear round her throat, 
buckled with an old diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was 
dragged a little up, and showed a red mark on her throat. 
arthur did not notice it, but i could hear the deep hiss of indrawn 
breath which is one of van helsing's ways of betraying emotion. he 
said nothing at the moment, but turned to me, saying, "now take down 
our brave young lover, give him of the port wine, and let him lie down 
a while. he must then go home and rest, sleep much and eat much, that 
he may be recruited of what he has so given to his love. he must not 
stay here. hold a moment! i may take it, sir, that you are anxious 
of result. then bring it with you, that in all ways the operation is 
successful. you have saved her life this time, and you can go home 
and rest easy in mind that all that can be is. i shall tell her all 
when she is well. she shall love you none the less for what you have 
done. goodbye." 
when arthur had gone i went back to the room. lucy was sleeping 
gently, but her breathing was stronger. i could see the counterpane 
move as her breast heaved. by the bedside sat van helsing, looking at 
her intently. the velvet band again covered the red mark. i asked 
the professor in a whisper, "what do you make of that mark on her 
throat?" 
"what do you make of it?" 
"i have not examined it yet," i answered, and then and there proceeded 
to loose the band. just over the external jugular vein there were two 
punctures, not large, but not wholesome looking. there was no sign of 
disease, but the edges were white and worn looking, as if by some 
trituration. it at once occurred to me that that this wound, or 
whatever it was, might be the means of that manifest loss of blood. 
but i abandoned the idea as soon as it formed, for such a thing could 
not be. the whole bed would have been drenched to a scarlet with the 
blood which the girl must have lost to leave such a pallor as she had 
before the transfusion. 
"well?" said van helsing. 
"well," said i. "i can make nothing of it." 
the professor stood up. "i must go back to amsterdam tonight," he 
said "there are books and things there which i want. you must remain 
here all night, and you must not let your sight pass from her." 
"shall i have a nurse?" i asked. 
"we are the best nurses, you and i. you keep watch all night. see 
that she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. you must not 
sleep all the night. later on we can sleep, you and i. i shall be 
back as soon as possible. and then we may begin." 
"may begin?" i said. "what on earth do you mean?" 
"we shall see!" he answered, as he hurried out. he came back a moment 
later and put his head inside the door and said with a warning finger 
held up, "remember, she is your charge. if you leave her, and harm 
befall, you shall not sleep easy hereafter!" 
dr. seward's diary-continued 
8 september.-i sat up all night with lucy. the opiate worked itself 
off towards dusk, and she waked naturally. she looked a different 
being from what she had been before the operation. her spirits even 
were good, and she was full of a happy vivacity, but i could see 
evidences of the absolute prostration which she had undergone. when i 
told mrs. westenra that dr. van helsing had directed that i should sit 
up with her, she almost pooh-poohed the idea, pointing out her 
daughter's renewed strength and excellent spirits. i was firm, 
however, and made preparations for my long vigil. when her maid had 
prepared her for the night i came in, having in the meantime had 
supper, and took a seat by the bedside. 
she did not in any way make objection, but looked at me gratefully 
whenever i caught her eye. after a long spell she seemed sinking off 
to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together and shook 
it off. it was apparent that she did not want to sleep, so i tackled 
the subject at once. 
"you do not want to sleep?" 
"no. i am afraid." 
"afraid to go to sleep! why so? it is the boon we all crave for." 
"ah, not if you were like me, if sleep was to you a presage of 
horror!" 
"a presage of horror! what on earth do you mean?" 
"i don't know. oh, i don't know. and that is what is so terrible. 
all this weakness comes to me in sleep, until i dread the very 
thought." 
"but, my dear girl, you may sleep tonight. i am here watching you, 
and i can promise that nothing will happen." 
"ah, i can trust you!" she said. 
i seized the opportunity, and said, "i promise that if i see any 
evidence of bad dreams i will wake you at once." 
"you will? oh, will you really? how good you are to me. then i will 
sleep!" and almost at the word she gave a deep sigh of relief, and 
sank back, asleep. 
all night long i watched by her. she never stirred, but slept on and 
on in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. her lips 
were slightly parted, and her breast rose and fell with the regularity 
of a pendulum. there was a smile on her face, and it was evident that 
no bad dreams had come to disturb her peace of mind. 
in the early morning her maid came, and i left her in her care and took 
myself back home, for i was anxious about many things. i sent a short 
wire to van helsing and to arthur, telling them of the excellent 
result of the operation. my own work, with its manifold arrears, took 
me all day to clear off. it was dark when i was able to inquire about 
my zoophagous patient. the report was good. he had been quite quiet 
for the past day and night. a telegram came from van helsing at 
amsterdam whilst i was at dinner, suggesting that i should be at 
hillingham tonight, as it might be well to be at hand, and stating 
that he was leaving by the night mail and would join me early in the 
morning. 
9 september.-i was pretty tired and worn out when i got to 
hillingham. for two nights i had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my 
brain was beginning to feel that numbness which marks cerebral 
exhaustion. lucy was up and in cheerful spirits. when she shook 
hands with me she looked sharply in my face and said, 
"no sitting up tonight for you. you are worn out. i am quite well 
again. indeed, i am, and if there is to be any sitting up, it is i 
who will sit up with you." 
i would not argue the point, but went and had my supper. lucy came 
with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence, i made an excellent 
meal, and had a couple of glasses of the more than excellent port. 
then lucy took me upstairs, and showed me a room next her own, where a 
cozy fire was burning. 
"now," she said. "you must stay here. i shall leave this door open 
and my door too. you can lie on the sofa for i know that nothing 
would induce any of you doctors to go to bed whilst there is a patient 
above the horizon. if i want anything i shall call out, and you can 
come to me at once." 
i could not but acquiesce, for i was dog tired, and could not have sat 
up had i tried. so, on her renewing her promise to call me if she 
should want anything, i lay on the sofa, and forgot all about 
everything. 
lucy westenra's diary 
9 september.-i feel so happy tonight. i have been so miserably weak, 
that to be able to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after 
a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. somehow arthur feels 
very, very close to me. i seem to feel his presence warm about me. i 
suppose it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn 
our inner eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength 
give love rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where he 
wills. i know where my thoughts are. if only arthur knew! my dear, 
my dear, your ears must tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking. oh, 
the blissful rest of last night! how i slept, with that dear, good 
dr. seward watching me. and tonight i shall not fear to sleep, since 
he is close at hand and within call. thank everybody for being so 
good to me. thank god! goodnight arthur. 
dr. seward's diary 
10 september.-i was conscious of the professor's hand on my head, and 
started awake all in a second. that is one of the things that we 
learn in an asylum, at any rate. 
"and how is our patient?" 
"well, when i left her, or rather when she left me," i answered. 
"come, let us see," he said. and together we went into the room. 
the blind was down, and i went over to raise it gently, whilst van 
helsing stepped, with his soft, cat-like tread, over to the bed. 
as i raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, i 
heard the professor's low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, 
a deadly fear shot through my heart. as i passed over he moved back, 
and his exclamation of horror, "gott in himmel!" needed no enforcement 
from his agonized face. he raised his hand and pointed to the bed, 
and his iron face was drawn and ashen white. i felt my knees begin to 
tremble. 
there on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor lucy, more horribly 
white and wan-looking than ever. even the lips were white, and the 
gums seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, as we sometimes see 
in a corpse after a prolonged illness. 
van helsing raised his foot to stamp in anger, but the instinct of his 
life and all the long years of habit stood to him, and he put it down 
again softly. 
"quick!" he said. "bring the brandy." 
i flew to the dining room, and returned with the decanter. he wetted 
the poor white lips with it, and together we rubbed palm and wrist and 
heart. he felt her heart, and after a few moments of agonizing 
suspense said, 
"it is not too late. it beats, though but feebly. all our work is 
undone. we must begin again. there is no young arthur here now. i 
have to call on you yourself this time, friend john." as he spoke, he 
was dipping into his bag, and producing the instruments of 
transfusion. i had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt sleeve. 
there was no possibility of an opiate just at present, and no need of 
one; and so, without a moment's delay, we began the operation. 
after a time, it did not seem a short time either, for the draining 
away of one's blood, no matter how willingly it be given, is a 
terrible feeling, van helsing held up a warning finger. "do not 
stir," he said. "but i fear that with growing strength she may wake, 
and that would make danger, oh, so much danger. but i shall 
precaution take. i shall give hypodermic injection of morphia." he 
proceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his intent. 
the effect on lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge subtly 
into the narcotic sleep. it was with a feeling of personal pride that 
i could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid cheeks 
and lips. no man knows, till he experiences it, what it is to feel 
his own lifeblood drawn away into the veins of the woman he loves. 
the professor watched me critically. "that will do," he said. 
"already?" i remonstrated. "you took a great deal more from art." to 
which he smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied, 
"he is her lover, her fiance. you have work, much work to do for her 
and for others, and the present will suffice." 
when we stopped the operation, he attended to lucy, whilst i applied 
digital pressure to my own incision. i laid down, while i waited his 
leisure to attend to me, for i felt faint and a little sick. by and 
by he bound up my wound, and sent me downstairs to get a glass of wine 
for myself. as i was leaving the room, he came after me, and half 
whispered. 
"mind, nothing must be said of this. if our young lover should turn 
up unexpected, as before, no word to him. it would at once frighten 
him and enjealous him, too. there must be none. so!" 
when i came back he looked at me carefully, and then said, "you are 
not much the worse. go into the room, and lie on your sofa, and rest 
awhile, then have much breakfast and come here to me." 
i followed out his orders, for i knew how right and wise they were. i 
had done my part, and now my next duty was to keep up my strength. i 
felt very weak, and in the weakness lost something of the amazement at 
what had occurred. i fell asleep on the sofa, however, wondering over 
and over again how lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and how 
she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign any where to 
show for it. i think i must have continued my wonder in my dreams, 
for, sleeping and waking my thoughts always came back to the little 
punctures in her throat and the ragged, exhausted appearance of their 
edges, tiny though they were. 
lucy slept well into the day, and when she woke she was fairly well 
and strong, though not nearly so much so as the day before. when van 
helsing had seen her, he went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, 
with strict injunctions that i was not to leave her for a moment. i 
could hear his voice in the hall, asking the way to the nearest 
telegraph office. 
lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that 
anything had happened. i tried to keep her amused and interested. 
when her mother came up to see her, she did not seem to notice any 
change whatever, but said to me gratefully, 
"we owe you so much, dr. seward, for all you have done, but you really 
must now take care not to overwork yourself. you are looking pale 
yourself. you want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit, that you 
do!" as she spoke, lucy turned crimson, though it was only 
momentarily, for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long an 
unwonted drain to the head. the reaction came in excessive pallor as 
she turned imploring eyes on me. i smiled and nodded, and laid my 
finger on my lips. with a sigh, she sank back amid her pillows. 
van helsing returned in a couple of hours, and presently said to me: 
"now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. make yourself 
strong. i stay here tonight, and i shall sit up with little miss 
myself. you and i must watch the case, and we must have none other to 
know. i have grave reasons. no, do not ask me. think what you will. 
do not fear to think even the most not-improbable. goodnight." 
in the hall two of the maids came to me, and asked if they or either 
of them might not sit up with miss lucy. they implored me to let 
them, and when i said it was dr. van helsing's wish that either he or 
i should sit up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with 
the 'foreign gentleman'. i was much touched by their kindness. perhaps 
it is because i am weak at present, and perhaps because it was on 
lucy's account, that their devotion was manifested. for over and over 
again have i seen similar instances of woman's kindness. i got back 
here in time for a late dinner, went my rounds, all well, and set this 
down whilst waiting for sleep. it is coming. 
11 september.-this afternoon i went over to hillingham. found van 
helsing in excellent spirits, and lucy much better. shortly after i 
had arrived, a big parcel from abroad came for the professor. he 
opened it with much impressment, assumed, of course, and showed a 
great bundle of white flowers. 
"these are for you, miss lucy," he said. 
"for me? oh, dr. van helsing!" 
"yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. these are medicines." 
here lucy made a wry face. "nay, but they are not to take in a 
decoction or in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming 
nose, or i shall point out to my friend arthur what woes he may have 
to endure in seeing so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. 
aha, my pretty miss, that bring the so nice nose all straight again. 
this is medicinal, but you do not know how. i put him in your window, 
i make pretty wreath, and hang him round your neck, so you sleep well. 
oh, yes! they, like the lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. 
it smell so like the waters of lethe, and of that fountain of youth 
that the conquistadores sought for in the floridas, and find him all 
too late." 
whilst he was speaking, lucy had been examining the flowers and 
smelling them. now she threw them down saying, with half laughter, 
and half disgust, 
"oh, professor, i believe you are only putting up a joke on me. why, 
these flowers are only common garlic." 
to my surprise, van helsing rose up and said with all his sternness, 
his iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows meeting, 
"no trifling with me! i never jest! there is grim purpose in what i 
do, and i warn you that you do not thwart me. take care, for the sake 
of others if not for your own." then seeing poor lucy scared, as she 
might well be, he went on more gently, "oh, little miss, my dear, do 
not fear me. i only do for your good, but there is much virtue to you 
in those so common flowers. see, i place them myself in your room. i 
make myself the wreath that you are to wear. but hush! no telling to 
others that make so inquisitive questions. we must obey, and silence 
is a part of obedience, and obedience is to bring you strong and well 
into loving arms that wait for you. now sit still a while. come with 
me, friend john, and you shall help me deck the room with my garlic, 
which is all the way from haarlem, where my friend vanderpool raise 
herb in his glass houses all the year. i had to telegraph yesterday, 
or they would not have been here." 
we went into the room, taking the flowers with us. the professor's 
actions were certainly odd and not to be found in any pharmacopeia 
that i ever heard of. first he fastened up the windows and latched 
them securely. next, taking a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them 
all over the sashes, as though to ensure that every whiff of air that 
might get in would be laden with the garlic smell. then with the wisp 
he rubbed all over the jamb of the door, above, below, and at each 
side, and round the fireplace in the same way. it all seemed 
grotesque to me, and presently i said, "well, professor, i know you 
always have a reason for what you do, but this certainly puzzles me. 
it is well we have no sceptic here, or he would say that you were 
working some spell to keep out an evil spirit." 
"perhaps i am!" he answered quietly as he began to make the wreath 
which lucy was to wear round her neck. 
we then waited whilst lucy made her toilet for the night, and when she 
was in bed he came and himself fixed the wreath of garlic round her 
neck. the last words he said to her were, 
"take care you do not disturb it, and even if the room feel close, do 
not tonight open the window or the door." 
"i promise," said lucy. "and thank you both a thousand times for all 
your kindness to me! oh, what have i done to be blessed with such 
friends?" 
as we left the house in my fly, which was waiting, van helsing said, 
"tonight i can sleep in peace, and sleep i want, two nights of travel, 
much reading in the day between, and much anxiety on the day to 
follow, and a night to sit up, without to wink. tomorrow in the 
morning early you call for me, and we come together to see our pretty 
miss, so much more strong for my 'spell' which i have work. ho, ho!" 
he seemed so confident that i, remembering my own confidence two 
nights before and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. 
it must have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my 
friend, but i felt it all the more, like unshed tears. 
chapter 11 
lucy westenra's diary 
12 september.-how good they all are to me. i quite love that dear 
dr. van helsing. i wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers. 
he positively frightened me, he was so fierce. and yet he must have 
been right, for i feel comfort from them already. somehow, i do not 
dread being alone tonight, and i can go to sleep without fear. i 
shall not mind any flapping outside the window. oh, the terrible 
struggle that i have had against sleep so often of late, the pain of 
sleeplessness, or the pain of the fear of sleep, and with such unknown 
horrors as it has for me! how blessed are some people, whose lives 
have no fears, no dreads, to whom sleep is a blessing that comes 
nightly, and brings nothing but sweet dreams. well, here i am 
tonight, hoping for sleep, and lying like ophelia in the play, with 
'virgin crants and maiden strewments.' i never liked garlic before, 
but tonight it is delightful! there is peace in its smell. i feel 
sleep coming already. goodnight, everybody. 
dr. seward's diary 
13 september.-called at the berkeley and found van helsing, as usual, 
up to time. the carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. the 
professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now. 
let all be put down exactly. van helsing and i arrived at hillingham 
at eight o'clock. it was a lovely morning. the bright sunshine and 
all the fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of 
nature's annual work. the leaves were turning to all kinds of 
beautiful colours, but had not yet begun to drop from the trees. when 
we entered we met mrs. westenra coming out of the morning room. she 
is always an early riser. she greeted us warmly and said, 
"you will be glad to know that lucy is better. the dear child is 
still asleep. i looked into her room and saw her, but did not go in, 
lest i should disturb her." the professor smiled, and looked quite 
jubilant. he rubbed his hands together, and said, "aha! i thought i 
had diagnosed the case. my treatment is working." 
to which she replied, "you must not take all the credit to yourself, 
doctor. lucy's state this morning is due in part to me." 
"how do you mean, ma'am?" asked the professor. 
"well, i was anxious about the dear child in the night, and went into 
her room. she was sleeping soundly, so soundly that even my coming 
did not wake her. but the room was awfully stuffy. there were a lot 
of those horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she 
had actually a bunch of them round her neck. i feared that the heavy 
odour would be too much for the dear child in her weak state, so i took 
them all away and opened a bit of the window to let in a little fresh 
air. you will be pleased with her, i am sure." 
she moved off into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early. 
as she had spoken, i watched the professor's face, and saw it turn 
ashen gray. he had been able to retain his self-command whilst the 
poor lady was present, for he knew her state and how mischievous a 
shock would be. he actually smiled on her as he held open the door 
for her to pass into her room. but the instant she had disappeared he 
pulled me, suddenly and forcibly, into the dining room and closed the 
door. 
then, for the first time in my life, i saw van helsing break down. he 
raised his hands over his head in a sort of mute despair, and then 
beat his palms together in a helpless way. finally he sat down on a 
chair, and putting his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, 
dry sobs that seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. 
then he raised his arms again, as though appealing to the whole 
universe. "god! god! god!" he said. "what have we done, what has 
this poor thing done, that we are so sore beset? is there fate 
amongst us still, send down from the pagan world of old, that such 
things must be, and in such way? this poor mother, all unknowing, and 
all for the best as she think, does such thing as lose her daughter 
body and soul, and we must not tell her, we must not even warn her, or 
she die, then both die. oh, how we are beset! how are all the powers 
of the devils against us!" 
suddenly he jumped to his feet. "come," he said, "come, we must see and 
act. devils or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not. 
we must fight him all the same." he went to the hall door for his 
bag, and together we went up to lucy's room. 
once again i drew up the blind, whilst van helsing went towards the 
bed. this time he did not start as he looked on the poor face with 
the same awful, waxen pallor as before. he wore a look of stern 
sadness and infinite pity. 
"as i expected," he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his 
which meant so much. without a word he went and locked the door, and 
then began to set out on the little table the instruments for yet 
another operation of transfusion of blood. i had long ago recognized 
the necessity, and begun to take off my coat, but he stopped me with a 
warning hand. "no!" he said. "today you must operate. i shall 
provide. you are weakened already." as he spoke he took off his coat 
and rolled up his shirtsleeve. 
again the operation. again the narcotic. again some return of colour 
to the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. this 
time i watched whilst van helsing recruited himself and rested. 
presently he took an opportunity of telling mrs. westenra that she 
must not remove anything from lucy's room without consulting him. 
that the flowers were of medicinal value, and that the breathing of 
their odour was a part of the system of cure. then he took over the 
care of the case himself, saying that he would watch this night and 
the next, and would send me word when to come. 
after another hour lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and 
seemingly not much the worse for her terrible ordeal. 
what does it all mean? i am beginning to wonder if my long habit of 
life amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon my own brain. 
lucy westenra's diary 
17 september.-four days and nights of peace. i am getting so strong 
again that i hardly know myself. it is as if i had passed through 
some long nightmare, and had just awakened to see the beautiful 
sunshine and feel the fresh air of the morning around me. i have a 
dim half remembrance of long, anxious times of waiting and fearing, 
darkness in which there was not even the pain of hope to make present 
distress more poignant. and then long spells of oblivion, and the 
rising back to life as a diver coming up through a great press of 
water. since, however, dr. van helsing has been with me, all this bad 
dreaming seems to have passed away. the noises that used to frighten 
me out of my wits, the flapping against the windows, the distant 
voices which seemed so close to me, the harsh sounds that came from i 
know not where and commanded me to do i know not what, have all 
ceased. i go to bed now without any fear of sleep. i do not even try 
to keep awake. i have grown quite fond of the garlic, and a boxful 
arrives for me every day from haarlem. tonight dr. van helsing is 
going away, as he has to be for a day in amsterdam. but i need not be 
watched. i am well enough to be left alone. 
thank god for mother's sake, and dear arthur's, and for all our 
friends who have been so kind! i shall not even feel the change, for 
last night dr. van helsing slept in his chair a lot of the time. i 
found him asleep twice when i awoke. but i did not fear to go to 
sleep again, although the boughs or bats or something flapped almost 
angrily against the window panes. 
the pall mall gazette 18 september. 
the escaped wolf perilous adventure of our interviewer 
interview with the keeper in the zoological gardens 
after many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and perpetually 
using the words 'pall mall gazette' as a sort of talisman, i managed 
to find the keeper of the section of the zoological gardens in which 
the wolf department is included. thomas bilder lives in one of the 
cottages in the enclosure behind the elephant house, and was just 
sitting down to his tea when i found him. thomas and his wife are 
hospitable folk, elderly, and without children, and if the specimen 
i enjoyed of their hospitality be of the average kind, their lives 
must be pretty comfortable. the keeper would not enter on what he 
called business until the supper was over, and we were all 
satisfied. then when the table was cleared, and he had lit his 
pipe, he said, 
"now, sir, you can go on and arsk me what you want. you'll excoose 
me refoosin' to talk of perfeshunal subjucts afore meals. i gives 
the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their 
tea afore i begins to arsk them questions." 
"how do you mean, ask them questions?" i queried, wishful to get him 
into a talkative humor. 
"'ittin' of them over the 'ead with a pole is one way. scratchin' of 
their ears in another, when gents as is flush wants a bit of a show- 
orf to their gals. i don't so much mind the fust, the 'ittin of the 
pole part afore i chucks in their dinner, but i waits till they've 
'ad their sherry and kawffee, so to speak, afore i tries on with the 
ear scratchin'. mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a 
deal of the same nature in us as in them theer animiles. here's you 
a-comin' and arskin' of me questions about my business, and i that 
grump-like that only for your bloomin' 'arf-quid i'd 'a' seen you 
blowed fust 'fore i'd answer. not even when you arsked me sarcastic 
like if i'd like you to arsk the superintendent if you might arsk me 
questions. without offence did i tell yer to go to 'ell?" 
"you did." 
"an' when you said you'd report me for usin' obscene language that 
was 'ittin' me over the 'ead. but the 'arf-quid made that all 
right. i weren't a-goin' to fight, so i waited for the food, and 
did with my 'owl as the wolves and lions and tigers does. but, lor' 
love yer 'art, now that the old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea- 
cake in me, an' rinsed me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and i've 
lit hup, you may scratch my ears for all you're worth, and won't 
even get a growl out of me. drive along with your questions. i 
know what yer a-comin' at, that 'ere escaped wolf." 
"exactly. i want you to give me your view of it. just tell me how 
it happened, and when i know the facts i'll get you to say what you 
consider was the cause of it, and how you think the whole affair 
will end." 
"all right, guv'nor. this 'ere is about the 'ole story. 
that 'ere wolf what we called bersicker was one of three gray 
ones that came from norway to jamrach's, which we bought 
off him four years ago. he was a nice well-behaved wolf, 
that never gave no trouble to talk of. i'm more surprised 
at 'im for wantin' to get out nor any other animile in the 
place. but, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor women." 
"don't you mind him, sir!" broke in mrs. tom, with a cheery 
laugh. "'e's got mindin' the animiles so long that blest 
if he ain't like a old wolf 'isself! but there ain't no 
'arm in 'im." 
"well, sir, it was about two hours after feedin' yesterday when i 
first hear my disturbance. i was makin' up a litter in the monkey 
house for a young puma which is ill. but when i heard the yelpin' 
and 'owlin' i kem away straight. there was bersicker a-tearin' like 
a mad thing at the bars as if he wanted to get out. there wasn't 
much people about that day, and close at hand was only one man, a 
tall, thin chap, with a 'ook nose and a pointed beard, with a few 
white hairs runnin' through it. he had a 'ard, cold look and red 
eyes, and i took a sort of mislike to him, for it seemed as if it 
was 'im as they was hirritated at. he 'ad white kid gloves on 'is 
'ands, and he pointed out the animiles to me and says, 'keeper, 
these wolves seem upset at something.' 
"'maybe it's you,' says i, for i did not like the airs as he 
give 'isself. he didn't get angry, as i 'oped he would, but 
he smiled a kind of insolent smile, with a mouth full of white, 
sharp teeth. 'oh no, they wouldn't like me,' 'e says. 
"'ow yes, they would,' says i, a-imitatin' of him. 'they 
always like a bone or two to clean their teeth on about tea 
time, which you 'as a bagful.' 
"well, it was a odd thing, but when the animiles see us 
a-talkin' they lay down, and when i went over to bersicker 
he let me stroke his ears same as ever. that there man kem 
over, and blessed but if he didn't put in his hand and stroke 
the old wolf's ears too! 
"'tyke care,' says i. 'bersicker is quick.' 
"'never mind,' he says. i'm used to 'em!' 
"'are you in the business yourself?' i says, tyking off my 
'at, for a man what trades in wolves, anceterer, is a good 
friend to keepers. 
"'nom,' says he, 'not exactly in the business, but i 'ave made pets 
of several.' and with that he lifts his 'at as perlite as a lord, 
and walks away. old bersicker kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e was 
out of sight, and then went and lay down in a corner and wouldn't 
come hout the 'ole hevening. well, larst night, so soon as the moon 
was hup, the wolves here all began a-'owling. there warn't nothing 
for them to 'owl at. there warn't no one near, except some one that 
was evidently a-callin' a dog somewheres out back of the gardings in 
the park road. once or twice i went out to see that all was right, 
and it was, and then the 'owling stopped. just before twelve 
o'clock i just took a look round afore turnin' in, an', bust me, but 
when i kem opposite to old bersicker's cage i see the rails broken 
and twisted about and the cage empty. and that's all i know for 
certing." 
"did any one else see anything?" 
"one of our gard'ners was a-comin' 'ome about that time from a 
'armony, when he sees a big gray dog comin' out through the garding 
'edges. at least, so he says, but i don't give much for it myself, 
for if he did 'e never said a word about it to his missis when 'e 
got 'ome, and it was only after the escape of the wolf was made 
known, and we had been up all night a-huntin' of the park for 
bersicker, that he remembered seein' anything. my own belief was 
that the 'armony 'ad got into his 'ead." 
"now, mr. bilder, can you account in any way for the escape 
of the wolf?" 
"well, sir," he said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "i think i 
can, but i don't know as 'ow you'd be satisfied with the theory." 
"certainly i shall. if a man like you, who knows the animals from 
experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, who is even to 
try?" 
"well then, sir, i accounts for it this way. it seems to me that 
'ere wolf escaped-simply because he wanted to get out." 
from the hearty way that both thomas and his wife laughed at the 
joke i could see that it had done service before, and that the whole 
explanation was simply an elaborate sell. i couldn't cope in 
badinage with the worthy thomas, but i thought i knew a surer way to 
his heart, so i said, "now, mr. bilder, we'll consider that first 
half-sovereign worked off, and this brother of his is waiting to be 
claimed when you've told me what you think will happen." 
"right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "ye'll excoose me, i 
know, for a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman here winked at 
me, which was as much as telling me to go on." 
"well, i never!" said the old lady. 
"my opinion is this: that 'ere wolf is a'idin' of, somewheres. the 
gard'ner wot didn't remember said he was a-gallopin' northward 
faster than a horse could go, but i don't believe him, for, yer see, 
sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built 
that way. wolves is fine things in a storybook, and i dessay when 
they gets in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more 
afeared than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it 
up, whatever it is. but, lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is 
only a low creature, not half so clever or bold as a good dog, and 
not half a quarter so much fight in 'im. this one ain't been used 
to fightin' or even to providin' for hisself, and more like he's 
somewhere round the park a'hidin' an' a'shiverin' of, and if he 
thinks at all, wonderin' where he is to get his breakfast from. or 
maybe he's got down some area and is in a coal cellar. my eye, 
won't some cook get a rum start when she sees his green eyes 
a-shinin' at her out of the dark! if he can't get food he's bound to 
look for it, and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher's shop 
in time. if he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes out walkin' or orf 
with a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator-well, 
then i shouldn't be surprised if the census is one babby the less. 
that's all." 
i was handing him the half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up 
against the window, and mr. bilder's face doubled its natural length 
with surprise. 
"god bless me!" he said. "if there ain't old bersicker come back by 
'isself!" 
he went to the door and opened it, a most unnecessary proceeding it 
seemed to me. i have always thought that a wild animal never looks 
so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between 
us. a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished 
that idea. 
after all, however, there is nothing like custom, for neither bilder 
nor his wife thought any more of the wolf than i should of a dog. 
the animal itself was a peaceful and well-behaved as that father of 
all picture-wolves, red riding hood's quondam friend, whilst moving 
her confidence in masquerade. 
the whole scene was a unutterable mixture of comedy and 
pathos. the wicked wolf that for a half a day had 
paralyzed london and set all the children in town shivering 
in their shoes, was there in a sort of penitent mood, and 
was received and petted like a sort of vulpine prodigal 
son. old bilder examined him all over with most tender 
solicitude, and when he had finished with his penitent 
said, 
"there, i knew the poor old chap would get into some kind of 
trouble. didn't i say it all along? here's his head all 
cut and full of broken glass. 'e's been a-gettin' over 
some bloomin' wall or other. it's a shyme that people are 
allowed to top their walls with broken bottles. this 'ere's 
what comes of it. come along, bersicker." 
he took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece 
of meat that satisfied, in quantity at any rate, the elementary 
conditions of the fatted calf, and went off to report. 
i came off too, to report the only exclusive information 
that is given today regarding the strange escapade at the 
zoo. 
dr. seward's diary 
17 september.-i was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my 
books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to lucy, 
had fallen sadly into arrear. suddenly the door was burst open, and 
in rushed my patient, with his face distorted with passion. i was 
thunderstruck, for such a thing as a patient getting of his own accord 
into the superintendent's study is almost unknown. 
without an instant's notice he made straight at me. he had a dinner 
knife in his hand, and as i saw he was dangerous, i tried to keep the 
table between us. he was too quick and too strong for me, however, 
for before i could get my balance he had struck at me and cut my left 
wrist rather severely. 
before he could strike again, however, i got in my right hand and he 
was sprawling on his back on the floor. my wrist bled freely, and 
quite a little pool trickled on to the carpet. i saw that my friend 
was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my 
wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. when 
the attendants rushed in, and we turned our attention to him, his 
employment positively sickened me. he was lying on his belly on the 
floor licking up, like a dog, the blood which had fallen from my 
wounded wrist. he was easily secured, and to my surprise, went with 
the attendants quite placidly, simply repeating over and over again, 
"the blood is the life! the blood is the life!" 
i cannot afford to lose blood just at present. i have lost too much 
of late for my physical good, and then the prolonged strain of lucy's 
illness and its horrible phases is telling on me. i am over excited 
and weary, and i need rest, rest, rest. happily van helsing has not 
summoned me, so i need not forego my sleep. tonight i could not well 
do without it. 
telegram, van helsing, antwerp, to seward, carfax 
(sent to carfax, sussex, as no county given, delivered late 
by twenty-two hours.) 
17 september.-do not fail to be at hilllingham tonight. 
if not watching all the time, frequently visit and see that 
flowers are as placed, very important, do not fail. shall 
be with you as soon as possible after arrival. 
dr. seward's diary 
18 september.-just off train to london. the arrival of van 
helsing's telegram filled me with dismay. a whole night lost, 
and i know by bitter experience what may happen in a night. 
of course it is possible that all may be well, but what may 
have happened? surely there is some horrible doom hanging over us 
that every possible accident should thwart us in all we try to do. 
i shall take this cylinder with me, and then i can complete 
my entry on lucy's phonograph. 
memorandum left by lucy westenra 
17 september, night.-i write this and leave it to be seen, 
so that no one may by any chance get into trouble through 
me. this is an exact record of what took place tonight. i 
feel i am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to 
write, but it must be done if i die in the doing. 
i went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were 
placed as dr. van helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. 
i was waked by the flapping at the window, which had begun after 
that sleep-walking on the cliff at whitby when mina saved me, and 
which now i know so well. i was not afraid, but i did wish that 
dr. seward was in the next room, as dr. van helsing said he would 
be, so that i might have called him. i tried to sleep, but i 
could not. then there came to me the old fear of sleep, and i 
determined to keep awake. perversely sleep would try to come then 
when i did not want it. so, as i feared to be alone, i opened my 
door and called out, "is there anybody there?" there was no 
answer. i was afraid to wake mother, and so closed my door 
again. then outside in the shrubbery i heard a sort of howl like 
a dog's, but more fierce and deeper. i went to the window and 
looked out, but could see nothing, except a big bat, which had 
evidently been buffeting its wings against the window. so i went 
back to bed again, but determined not to go to sleep. presently 
the door opened, and mother looked in. seeing by my moving that 
i was not asleep, she came in and sat by me. she said to me even 
more sweetly and softly than her wont, 
"i was uneasy about you, darling, and came in to see that 
you were all right." 
i feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her 
to come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay 
down beside me. she did not take off her dressing gown, 
for she said she would only stay a while and then go back 
to her own bed. as she lay there in my arms, and i in hers 
the flapping and buffeting came to the window again. she 
was startled and a little frightened, and cried out, "what 
is that?" 
i tried to pacify her, and at last succeeded, and she lay 
quiet. but i could hear her poor dear heart still beating 
terribly. after a while there was the howl again out in 
the shrubbery, and shortly after there was a crash at the 
window, and a lot of broken glass was hurled on the floor. 
the window blind blew back with the wind that rushed in, 
and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the head 
of a great, gaunt gray wolf. 
mother cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a 
sitting posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would 
help her. amongst other things, she clutched the wreath of 
flowers that dr. van helsing insisted on my wearing round 
my neck, and tore it away from me. for a second or two she 
sat up, pointing at the wolf, and there was a strange and 
horrible gurgling in her throat. then she fell over, as if 
struck with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and 
made me dizzy for a moment or two. 
the room and all round seemed to spin round. i kept my eyes 
fixed on the window, but the wolf drew his head back, and a whole 
myriad of little specks seems to come blowing in through the 
broken window, and wheeling and circling round like the pillar of 
dust that travellers describe when there is a simoon in the 
desert. i tried to stir, but there was some spell upon me, and 
dear mother's poor body, which seemed to grow cold already, for 
her dear heart had ceased to beat, weighed me down, and i 
remembered no more for a while. 
the time did not seem long, but very, very awful, till i 
recovered consciousness again. somewhere near, a passing 
bell was tolling. the dogs all round the neighbourhood were 
howling, and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a 
nightingale was singing. i was dazed and stupid with pain 
and terror and weakness, but the sound of the nightingale 
seemed like the voice of my dead mother come back to comfort me. 
the sounds seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for i could 
hear their bare feet pattering outside my door. i called to 
them, and they came in, and when they saw what had happened, and 
what it was that lay over me on the bed, they screamed out. the 
wind rushed in through the broken window, and the door slammed 
to. they lifted off the body of my dear mother, and laid her, 
covered up with a sheet, on the bed after i had got up. they 
were all so frightened and nervous that i directed them to go to 
the dining room and each have a glass of wine. the door flew 
open for an instant and closed again. the maids shrieked, and 
then went in a body to the dining room, and i laid what flowers i 
had on my dear mother's breast. when they were there i 
remembered what dr. van helsing had told me, but i didn't like to 
remove them, and besides, i would have some of the servants to 
sit up with me now. i was surprised that the maids did not come 
back. i called them, but got no answer, so i went to the dining 
room to look for them. 
my heart sank when i saw what had happened. they all four 
lay helpless on the floor, breathing heavily. the decanter 
of sherry was on the table half full, but there was a queer, 
acrid smell about. i was suspicious, and examined the decanter. 
it smelt of laudanum, and looking on the sideboard, i found that 
the bottle which mother's doctor uses for her-oh! did use-was 
empty. what am i to do? what am i to do? i am back in the room 
with mother. i cannot leave her, and i am alone, save for the 
sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. alone with the 
dead! i dare not go out, for i can hear the low howl of the wolf 
through the broken window. 
the air seems full of specks, floating and circling in the 
draught from the window, and the lights burn blue and dim. 
what am i to do? god shield me from harm this night! i 
shall hide this paper in my breast, where they shall find 
it when they come to lay me out. my dear mother gone! it 
is time that i go too. goodbye, dear arthur, if i should 
not survive this night. god keep you, dear, and god help 
me! 
chapter 12 
dr. seward's diary 
18 september.-i drove at once to hillingham and arrived early. 
keeping my cab at the gate, i went up the avenue alone. i knocked 
gently and rang as quietly as possible, for i feared to disturb lucy 
or her mother, and hoped to only bring a servant to the door. after a 
while, finding no response, i knocked and rang again, still no 
answer. i cursed the laziness of the servants that they should lie 
abed at such an hour, for it was now ten o'clock, and so rang and 
knocked again, but more impatiently, but still without response. 
hitherto i had blamed only the servants, but now a terrible fear began 
to assail me. was this desolation but another link in the chain of 
doom which seemed drawing tight round us? was it indeed a house of 
death to which i had come, too late? i know that minutes, even 
seconds of delay, might mean hours of danger to lucy, if she had had 
again one of those frightful relapses, and i went round the house to 
try if i could find by chance an entry anywhere. 
i could find no means of ingress. every window and door was fastened 
and locked, and i returned baffled to the porch. as i did so, i heard 
the rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse's feet. they stopped at 
the gate, and a few seconds later i met van helsing running up the 
avenue. when he saw me, he gasped out, "then it was you, and just 
arrived. how is she? are we too late? did you not get my telegram?" 
i answered as quickly and coherently as i could that i had only got 
his telegram early in the morning, and had not a minute in coming 
here, and that i could not make any one in the house hear me. he 
paused and raised his hat as he said solemnly, "then i fear we are too 
late. god's will be done!" 
with his usual recuperative energy, he went on, "come. if there be no 
way open to get in, we must make one. time is all in all to us now." 
we went round to the back of the house, where there was a kitchen 
window. the professor took a small surgical saw from his case, and 
handing it to me, pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. 
i attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. 
then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the 
sashes and opened the window. i helped the professor in, and followed 
him. there was no one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which 
were close at hand. we tried all the rooms as we went along, and in 
the dining room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, 
found four servant women lying on the floor. there was no need to 
think them dead, for their stertorous breathing and the acrid smell of 
laudanum in the room left no doubt as to their condition. 
van helsing and i looked at each other, and as we moved away he said, 
"we can attend to them later." then we ascended to lucy's room. for an 
instant or two we paused at the door to listen, but there was no sound 
that we could hear. with white faces and trembling hands, we opened 
the door gently, and entered the room. 
how shall i describe what we saw? on the bed lay two women, lucy and 
her mother. the latter lay farthest in, and she was covered with a 
white sheet, the edge of which had been blown back by the drought 
through the broken window, showing the drawn, white, face, with a look 
of terror fixed upon it. by her side lay lucy, with face white and 
still more drawn. the flowers which had been round her neck we found 
upon her mother's bosom, and her throat was bare, showing the two 
little wounds which we had noticed before, but looking horribly white 
and mangled. without a word the professor bent over the bed, his head 
almost touching poor lucy's breast. then he gave a quick turn of his 
head, as of one who listens, and leaping to his feet, he cried out to 
me, "it is not yet too late! quick! quick! bring the brandy!" 
i flew downstairs and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste 
it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry which i 
found on the table. the maids were still breathing, but more 
restlessly, and i fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. i did 
not stay to make sure, but returned to van helsing. he rubbed the 
brandy, as on another occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists 
and the palms of her hands. he said to me, "i can do this, all that 
can be at the present. you go wake those maids. flick them in the 
face with a wet towel, and flick them hard. make them get heat and 
fire and a warm bath. this poor soul is nearly as cold as that beside 
her. she will need be heated before we can do anything more." 
i went at once, and found little difficulty in waking three of the 
women. the fourth was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently 
affected her more strongly so i lifted her on the sofa and let her 
sleep. 
the others were dazed at first, but as remembrance came back to them 
they cried and sobbed in a hysterical manner. i was stern with them, 
however, and would not let them talk. i told them that one life was 
bad enough to lose, and if they delayed they would sacrifice miss 
lucy. so, sobbing and crying they went about their way, half clad as 
they were, and prepared fire and water. fortunately, the kitchen and 
boiler fires were still alive, and there was no lack of hot water. we 
got a bath and carried lucy out as she was and placed her in it. 
whilst we were busy chafing her limbs there was a knock at the hall 
door. one of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and 
opened it. then she returned and whispered to us that there was a 
gentleman who had come with a message from mr. holmwood. i bade her 
simply tell him that he must wait, for we could see no one now. she 
went away with the message, and, engrossed with our work, i clean 
forgot all about him. 
i never saw in all my experience the professor work in such deadly 
earnest. i knew, as he knew, that it was a stand-up fight with death, 
and in a pause told him so. he answered me in a way that i did not 
understand, but with the sternest look that his face could wear. 
"if that were all, i would stop here where we are now, and let her 
fade away into peace, for i see no light in life over her horizon." he 
went on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied 
vigour. 
presently we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to 
be of some effect. lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the 
stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. van helsing's 
face almost beamed, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her 
in a hot sheet to dry her he said to me, "the first gain is ours! 
check to the king!" 
we took lucy into another room, which had by now been prepared, and 
laid her in bed and forced a few drops of brandy down her throat. i 
noticed that van helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her 
throat. she was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not 
worse than, we had ever seen her. 
van helsing called in one of the women, and told her to stay with her 
and not to take her eyes off her till we returned, and then beckoned 
me out of the room. 
"we must consult as to what is to be done," he said as we descended 
the stairs. in the hall he opened the dining room door, and we passed 
in, he closing the door carefully behind him. the shutters had been 
opened, but the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the 
etiquette of death which the british woman of the lower classes always 
rigidly observes. the room was, therefore, dimly dark. it was, 
however, light enough for our purposes. van helsing's sternness was 
somewhat relieved by a look of perplexity. he was evidently torturing 
his mind about something, so i waited for an instant, and he spoke. 
"what are we to do now? where are we to turn for help? we must have 
another transfusion of blood, and that soon, or that poor girl's life 
won't be worth an hour's purchase. you are exhausted already. i am 
exhausted too. i fear to trust those women, even if they would have 
courage to submit. what are we to do for some one who will open his 
veins for her?" 
"what's the matter with me, anyhow?" 
the voice came from the sofa across the room, and its tones brought 
relief and joy to my heart, for they were those of quincey morris. 
van helsing started angrily at the first sound, but his face softened 
and a glad look came into his eyes as i cried out, "quincey morris!" 
and rushed towards him with outstretched hands. 
"what brought you here?" i cried as our hands met. 
"i guess art is the cause." 
he handed me a telegram.-'have not heard from seward for three days, 
and am terribly anxious. cannot leave. father still in same 
condition. send me word how lucy is. do not delay.-holmwood.' 
"i think i came just in the nick of time. you know you have only to 
tell me what to do." 
van helsing strode forward, and took his hand, looking him straight in 
the eyes as he said, "a brave man's blood is the best thing on this 
earth when a woman is in trouble. you're a man and no mistake. well, 
the devil may work against us for all he's worth, but god sends us men 
when we want them." 
once again we went through that ghastly operation. i have not the 
heart to go through with the details. lucy had got a terrible shock 
and it told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went 
into her veins, her body did not respond to the treatment as well as 
on the other occasions. her struggle back into life was something 
frightful to see and hear. however, the action of both heart and 
lungs improved, and van helsing made a sub-cutaneous injection of 
morphia, as before, and with good effect. her faint became a profound 
slumber. the professor watched whilst i went downstairs with quincey 
morris, and sent one of the maids to pay off one of the cabmen who 
were waiting. 
i left quincey lying down after having a glass of wine, and told the 
cook to get ready a good breakfast. then a thought struck me, and i 
went back to the room where lucy now was. when i came softly in, i 
found van helsing with a sheet or two of note paper in his hand. he 
had evidently read it, and was thinking it over as he sat with his 
hand to his brow. there was a look of grim satisfaction in his face, 
as of one who has had a doubt solved. he handed me the paper saying 
only, "it dropped from lucy's breast when we carried her to the bath." 
when i had read it, i stood looking at the professor, and after a 
pause asked him, "in god's name, what does it all mean? was she, or 
is she, mad, or what sort of horrible danger is it?" i was so 
bewildered that i did not know what to say more. van helsing put out 
his hand and took the paper, saying, 
"do not trouble about it now. forget it for the present. you shall 
know and understand it all in good time, but it will be later. and 
now what is it that you came to me to say?" this brought me back to 
fact, and i was all myself again. 
"i came to speak about the certificate of death. if we do not act 
properly and wisely, there may be an inquest, and that paper would 
have to be produced. i am in hopes that we need have no inquest, for 
if we had it would surely kill poor lucy, if nothing else did. i 
know, and you know, and the other doctor who attended her knows, that 
mrs. westenra had disease of the heart, and we can certify that she 
died of it. let us fill up the certificate at once, and i shall take 
it myself to the registrar and go on to the undertaker." 
"good, oh my friend john! well thought of! truly miss lucy, if she 
be sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends 
that love her. one, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides 
one old man. ah, yes, i know, friend john. i am not blind! i love 
you all the more for it! now go." 
in the hall i met quincey morris, with a telegram for arthur telling 
him that mrs. westenra was dead, that lucy also had been ill, but was 
now going on better, and that van helsing and i were with her. i told 
him where i was going, and he hurried me out, but as i was going said, 
"when you come back, jack, may i have two words with you all to 
ourselves?" i nodded in reply and went out. i found no difficulty 
about the registration, and arranged with the local undertaker to come 
up in the evening to measure for the coffin and to make arrangements. 
when i got back quincey was waiting for me. i told him i would see 
him as soon as i knew about lucy, and went up to her room. she was 
still sleeping, and the professor seemingly had not moved from his 
seat at her side. from his putting his finger to his lips, i gathered 
that he expected her to wake before long and was afraid of 
fore-stalling nature. so i went down to quincey and took him into the 
breakfast room, where the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a 
little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. 
when we were alone, he said to me, "jack seward, i don't want to shove 
myself in anywhere where i've no right to be, but this is no ordinary 
case. you know i loved that girl and wanted to marry her, but 
although that's all past and gone, i can't help feeling anxious about 
her all the same. what is it that's wrong with her? the dutchman, 
and a fine old fellow he is, i can see that, said that time you two 
came into the room, that you must have another transfusion of blood, 
and that both you and he were exhausted. now i know well that you 
medical men speak in camera, and that a man must not expect to know 
what they consult about in private. but this is no common matter, and 
whatever it is, i have done my part. is not that so?" 
"that's so," i said, and he went on. 
"i take it that both you and van helsing had done already what i did 
today. is not that so?" 
"that's so." 
"and i guess art was in it too. when i saw him four days ago down at 
his own place he looked queer. i have not seen anything pulled down 
so quick since i was on the pampas and had a mare that i was fond of 
go to grass all in a night. one of those big bats that they call 
vampires had got at her in the night, and what with his gorge and the 
vein left open, there wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up, 
and i had to put a bullet through her as she lay. jack, if you may 
tell me without betraying confidence, arthur was the first, is not 
that so?" 
as he spoke the poor fellow looked terribly anxious. he was in a 
torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter 
ignorance of the terrible mystery which seemed to surround her 
intensified his pain. his very heart was bleeding, and it took all 
the manhood of him, and there was a royal lot of it, too, to keep him 
from breaking down. i paused before answering, for i felt that i must 
not betray anything which the professor wished kept secret, but 
already he knew so much, and guessed so much, that there could be no 
reason for not answering, so i answered in the same phrase. 
"that's so." 
"and how long has this been going on?" 
"about ten days." 
"ten days! then i guess, jack seward, that that poor pretty creature 
that we all love has had put into her veins within that time the blood 
of four strong men. man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." then 
coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whisper. "what took it 
out?" 
i shook my head. "that," i said, "is the crux. van helsing is simply 
frantic about it, and i am at my wits' end. i can't even hazard a 
guess. there has been a series of little circumstances which have 
thrown out all our calculations as to lucy being properly watched. 
but these shall not occur again. here we stay until all be well, or 
ill." 
quincey held out his hand. "count me in," he said. "you and the 
dutchman will tell me what to do, and i'll do it." 
when she woke late in the afternoon, lucy's first movement was to feel 
in her breast, and to my surprise, produced the paper which van 
helsing had given me to read. the careful professor had replaced it 
where it had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. her 
eyes then lit on van helsing and on me too, and gladdened. then she 
looked round the room, and seeing where she was, shuddered. she gave 
a loud cry, and put her poor thin hands before her pale face. 
we both understood what was meant, that she had realized to the full 
her mother's death. so we tried what we could to comfort her. 
doubtless sympathy eased her somewhat, but she was very low in thought 
and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for a long time. we told her 
that either or both of us would now remain with her all the time, and 
that seemed to comfort her. towards dusk she fell into a doze. here 
a very odd thing occurred. whilst still asleep she took the paper 
from her breast and tore it in two. van helsing stepped over and took 
the pieces from her. all the same, however, she went on with the 
action of tearing, as though the material were still in her hands. 
finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering the 
fragments. van helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as if 
in thought, but he said nothing. 
19 september.-all last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid 
to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from it. the professor 
and i took in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment 
unattended. quincey morris said nothing about his intention, but i 
knew that all night long he patrolled round and round the house. 
when the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor 
lucy's strength. she was hardly able to turn her head, and the little 
nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. at times 
she slept, and both van helsing and i noticed the difference in her, 
between sleeping and waking. whilst asleep she looked stronger, 
although more haggard, and her breathing was softer. her open mouth 
showed the pale gums drawn back from the teeth, which looked 
positively longer and sharper than usual. when she woke the softness 
of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her own 
self, although a dying one. in the afternoon she asked for arthur, 
and we telegraphed for him. quincey went off to meet him at the 
station. 
when he arrived it was nearly six o'clock, and the sun was setting 
full and warm, and the red light streamed in through the window and 
gave more colour to the pale cheeks. when he saw her, arthur was 
simply choking with emotion, and none of us could speak. in the hours 
that had passed, the fits of sleep, or the comatose condition that 
passed for it, had grown more frequent, so that the pauses when 
conversation was possible were shortened. arthur's presence, however, 
seemed to act as a stimulant. she rallied a little, and spoke to him 
more brightly than she had done since we arrived. he too pulled 
himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, so that the best 
was made of everything. 
it is now nearly one o'clock, and he and van helsing are sitting with 
her. i am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and i am entering 
this on lucy's phonograph. until six o'clock they are to try to rest. 
i fear that tomorrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too 
great. the poor child cannot rally. god help us all. 
letter mina harker to lucy westenra 
(unopened by her) 
17 september 
my dearest lucy, 
"it seems an age since i heard from you, or indeed since i 
wrote. you will pardon me, i know, for all my faults when 
you have read all my budget of news. well, i got my husband back 
all right. when we arrived at exeter there was a carriage 
waiting for us, and in it, though he had an attack of gout, mr. 
hawkins. he took us to his house, where there were rooms for us 
all nice and comfortable, and we dined together. after dinner 
mr. hawkins said, 
"'my dears, i want to drink your health and prosperity, and 
may every blessing attend you both. i know you both from 
children, and have, with love and pride, seen you grow up. 
now i want you to make your home here with me. i have left 
to me neither chick nor child. all are gone, and in my 
will i have left you everything.' i cried, lucy dear, as 
jonathan and the old man clasped hands. our evening was a 
very, very happy one. 
"so here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and 
from both my bedroom and the drawing room i can see the 
great elms of the cathedral close, with their great black 
stems standing out against the old yellow stone of the cathedral, 
and i can hear the rooks overhead cawing and cawing and 
chattering and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner 
of rooks-and humans. i am busy, i need not tell you, arranging 
things and housekeeping. jonathan and mr. hawkins are busy all 
day, for now that jonathan is a partner, mr. hawkins wants to 
tell him all about the clients. 
"how is your dear mother getting on? i wish i could run up 
to town for a day or two to see you, dear, but i dare not 
go yet, with so much on my shoulders, and jonathan wants 
looking after still. he is beginning to put some flesh on 
his bones again, but he was terribly weakened by the long 
illness. even now he sometimes starts out of his sleep in 
a sudden way and awakes all trembling until i can coax him 
back to his usual placidity. however, thank god, these 
occasions grow less frequent as the days go on, and they 
will in time pass away altogether, i trust. and now i have 
told you my news, let me ask yours. when are you to be 
married, and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and 
what are you to wear, and is it to be a public or private 
wedding? tell me all about it, dear, tell me all about 
everything, for there is nothing which interests you which 
will not be dear to me. jonathan asks me to send his 'respectful 
duty', but i do not think that is good enough from the junior 
partner of the important firm hawkins & harker. and so, as you 
love me, and he loves me, and i love you with all the moods and 
tenses of the verb, i send you simply his 'love' instead. 
goodbye, my dearest lucy, and blessings on you. 
"yours, 
"mina harker" 
report from patrick hennessey, md, mrcslk, qcpi, etc, etc, 
to john seward, md 
20 september 
my dear sir: 
"in accordance with your wishes, i enclose report of the 
conditions of everything left in my charge. with regard to 
patient, renfield, there is more to say. he has had another 
outbreak, which might have had a dreadful ending, but which, as 
it fortunately happened, was unattended with any unhappy results. 
this afternoon a carrier's cart with two men made a call at the 
empty house whose grounds abut on ours, the house to which, you 
will remember, the patient twice ran away. the men stopped at 
our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers. 
"i was myself looking out of the study window, having a 
smoke after dinner, and saw one of them come up to the 
house. as he passed the window of renfield's room, the 
patient began to rate him from within, and called him all 
the foul names he could lay his tongue to. the man, who 
seemed a decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling 
him to 'shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar', whereon our man 
accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and 
said that he would hinder him if he were to swing for it. 
i opened the window and signed to the man not to notice, so 
he contented himself after looking the place over and making up 
his mind as to what kind of place he had got to by saying, 'lor' 
bless yer, sir, i wouldn't mind what was said to me in a bloomin' 
madhouse. i pity ye and the guv'nor for havin' to live in the 
house with a wild beast like that.' 
"then he asked his way civilly enough, and i told him where 
the gate of the empty house was. he went away followed by 
threats and curses and revilings from our man. i went down 
to see if i could make out any cause for his anger, since 
he is usually such a well-behaved man, and except his violent 
fits nothing of the kind had ever occurred. i found him, to my 
astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his manner. i 
tried to get him to talk of the incident, but he blandly asked me 
questions as to what i meant, and led me to believe that he was 
completely oblivious of the affair. it was, i am sorry to say, 
however, only another instance of his cunning, for within half an 
hour i heard of him again. this time he had broken out through 
the window of his room, and was running down the avenue. i 
called to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for i 
feared he was intent on some mischief. my fear was justified 
when i saw the same cart which had passed before coming down the 
road, having on it some great wooden boxes. the men were wiping 
their foreheads, and were flushed in the face, as if with violent 
exercise. before i could get up to him, the patient rushed at 
them, and pulling one of them off the cart, began to knock his 
head against the ground. if i had not seized him just at the 
moment, i believe he would have killed the man there and then. 
the other fellow jumped down and struck him over the head with 
the butt end of his heavy whip. it was a horrible blow, but he 
did not seem to mind it, but seized him also, and struggled with 
the three of us, pulling us to and fro as if we were kittens. 
you know i am no lightweight, and the others were both burly men. 
at first he was silent in his fighting, but as we began to master 
him, and the attendants were putting a strait waistcoat on him, 
he began to shout, 'i'll frustrate them! they shan't rob me! 
they shan't murder me by inches! i'll fight for my lord and 
master!' and all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. it was 
with very considerable difficulty that they got him back to the 
house and put him in the padded room. one of the attendants, 
hardy, had a finger broken. however, i set it all right, and he 
is going on well. 
"the two carriers were at first loud in their threats of 
actions for damages, and promised to rain all the penalties 
of the law on us. their threats were, however, mingled 
with some sort of indirect apology for the defeat of the 
two of them by a feeble madman. they said that if it had 
not been for the way their strength had been spent in carrying 
and raising the heavy boxes to the cart they would have made 
short work of him. they gave as another reason for their defeat 
the extraordinary state of drouth to which they had been reduced 
by the dusty nature of their occupation and the reprehensible 
distance from the scene of their labors of any place of public 
entertainment. i quite understood their drift, and after a stiff 
glass of strong grog, or rather more of the same, and with each a 
sovereign in hand, they made light of the attack, and swore that 
they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure of 
meeting so 'bloomin' good a bloke' as your correspondent. i took 
their names and addresses, in case they might be needed. they 
are as follows: jack smollet, of dudding's rents, king george's 
road, great walworth, and thomas snelling, peter farley's row, 
guide court, bethnal green. they are both in the employment of 
harris & sons, moving and shipment company, orange master's yard, 
soho. 
"i shall report to you any matter of interest occurring here, and 
shall wire you at once if there is anything of importance. 
"believe me, dear sir, 
"yours faithfully, 
"patrick hennessey." 
letter, mina harker to lucy westenra (unopened by her) 
18 september 
"my dearest lucy, 
"such a sad blow has befallen us. mr. hawkins has died very 
suddenly. some may not think it so sad for us, but we had 
both come to so love him that it really seems as though we 
had lost a father. i never knew either father or mother, 
so that the dear old man's death is a real blow to me. jonathan 
is greatly distressed. it is not only that he feels sorrow, deep 
sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his 
life, and now at the end has treated him like his own son and 
left him a fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is 
wealth beyond the dream of avarice, but jonathan feels it on 
another account. he says the amount of responsibility which it 
puts upon him makes him nervous. he begins to doubt himself. i 
try to cheer him up, and my belief in him helps him to have a 
belief in himself. but it is here that the grave shock that he 
experienced tells upon him the most. oh, it is too hard that a 
sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his, a nature which 
enabled him by our dear, good friend's aid to rise from clerk to 
master in a few years, should be so injured that the very essence 
of its strength is gone. forgive me, dear, if i worry you with my 
troubles in the midst of your own happiness, but lucy dear, i 
must tell someone, for the strain of keeping up a brave and 
cheerful appearance to jonathan tries me, and i have no one here 
that i can confide in. i dread coming up to london, as we must 
do that day after tomorrow, for poor mr. hawkins left in his will 
that he was to be buried in the grave with his father. as there 
are no relations at all, jonathan will have to be chief mourner. 
i shall try to run over to see you, dearest, if only for a few 
minutes. forgive me for troubling you. with all blessings, 
"your loving 
"mina harker" 
dr. seward's diary 
20 september.-only resolution and habit can let me make an entry 
tonight. i am too miserable, too low spirited, too sick of the world 
and all in it, including life itself, that i would not care if i heard 
this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. and he 
has been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late, lucy's 
mother and arthur's father, and now . . . let me get on with my work. 
i duly relieved van helsing in his watch over lucy. we wanted arthur 
to go to rest also, but he refused at first. it was only when i told 
him that we should want him to help us during the day, and that we 
must not all break down for want of rest, lest lucy should suffer, 
that he agreed to go. 
van helsing was very kind to him. "come, my child," he said. "come 
with me. you are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much 
mental pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. 
you must not be alone, for to be alone is to be full of fears and 
alarms. come to the drawing room, where there is a big fire, and 
there are two sofas. you shall lie on one, and i on the other, and 
our sympathy will be comfort to each other, even though we do not 
speak, and even if we sleep." 
arthur went off with him, casting back a longing look on lucy's face, 
which lay in her pillow, almost whiter than the lawn. she lay quite 
still, and i looked around the room to see that all was as it should 
be. i could see that the professor had carried out in this room, as 
in the other, his purpose of using the garlic. the whole of the 
window sashes reeked with it, and round lucy's neck, over the silk 
handkerchief which van helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet 
of the same odorous flowers. 
lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and her face was at its 
worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. her teeth, in the 
dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than they had been in 
the morning. in particular, by some trick of the light, the canine 
teeth looked longer and sharper than the rest. 
i sat down beside her, and presently she moved uneasily. at the same 
moment there came a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. 
i went over to it softly, and peeped out by the corner of the blind. 
there was a full moonlight, and i could see that the noise was made by 
a great bat, which wheeled around, doubtless attracted by the light, 
although so dim, and every now and again struck the window with its 
wings. when i came back to my seat, i found that lucy had moved 
slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers from her throat. i 
replaced them as well as i could, and sat watching her. 
presently she woke, and i gave her food, as van helsing had 
prescribed. she took but a little, and that languidly. there did not 
seem to be with her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength 
that had hitherto so marked her illness. it struck me as curious that 
the moment she became conscious she pressed the garlic flowers close 
to her. it was certainly odd that whenever she got into that 
lethargic state, with the stertorous breathing, she put the flowers 
from her, but that when she waked she clutched them close, there was 
no possibility of making any mistake about this, for in the long hours 
that followed, she had many spells of sleeping and waking and repeated 
both actions many times. 
at six o'clock van helsing came to relieve me. arthur had then fallen 
into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. when he saw lucy's 
face i could hear the hissing indraw of breath, and he said to me in a 
sharp whisper. "draw up the blind. i want light!" then he bent down, 
and, with his face almost touching lucy's, examined her carefully. he 
removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat. 
as he did so he started back and i could hear his ejaculation, "mein 
gott!" as it was smothered in his throat. i bent over and looked, 
too, and as i noticed some queer chill came over me. the wounds on 
the throat had absolutely disappeared. 
for fully five minutes van helsing stood looking at her, with his face 
at its sternest. then he turned to me and said calmly, "she is 
dying. it will not be long now. it will be much difference, mark me, 
whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. wake that poor boy, and 
let him come and see the last. he trusts us, and we have promised 
him." 
i went to the dining room and waked him. he was dazed for a moment, 
but when he saw the sunlight streaming in through the edges of the 
shutters he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. i assured 
him that lucy was still asleep, but told him as gently as i could that 
both van helsing and i feared that the end was near. he covered his 
face with his hands, and slid down on his knees by the sofa, where he 
remained, perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his 
shoulders shook with grief. i took him by the hand and raised him up. 
"come," i said, "my dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude. it 
will be best and easiest for her." 
when we came into lucy's room i could see that van helsing had, with 
his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making 
everything look as pleasing as possible. he had even brushed lucy's 
hair, so that it lay on the pillow in its usual sunny ripples. when 
we came into the room she opened her eyes, and seeing him, whispered 
softly, "arthur! oh, my love, i am so glad you have come!" 
he was stooping to kiss her, when van helsing motioned him back. 
"no," he whispered, "not yet! hold her hand, it will comfort her 
more." 
so arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and she looked her best, 
with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her eyes. then 
gradually her eyes closed, and she sank to sleep. for a little bit 
her breast heaved softly, and her breath came and went like a tired 
child's. 
and then insensibly there came the strange change which i had noticed 
in the night. her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and 
the pale gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than 
ever. in a sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened 
her eyes, which were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft, 
voluptuous voice, such as i had never heard from her lips, "arthur! 
oh, my love, i am so glad you have come! kiss me!" 
arthur bent eagerly over to kiss her, but at that instant van helsing, 
who, like me, had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and 
catching him by the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury 
of strength which i never thought he could have possessed, and 
actually hurled him almost across the room. 
"not on your life!" he said, "not for your living soul and hers!" and 
he stood between them like a lion at bay. 
arthur was so taken aback that he did not for a moment know what to do 
or say, and before any impulse of violence could seize him he realized 
the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting. 
i kept my eyes fixed on lucy, as did van helsing, and we saw a spasm 
as of rage flit like a shadow over her face. the sharp teeth clamped 
together. then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily. 
very shortly after she opened her eyes in all their softness, and 
putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took van helsing's great brown 
one, drawing it close to her, she kissed it. "my true friend," she 
said, in a faint voice, but with untellable pathos, "my true friend, 
and his! oh, guard him, and give me peace!" 
"i swear it!" he said solemnly, kneeling beside her and holding up his 
hand, as one who registers an oath. then he turned to arthur, and 
said to him, "come, my child, take her hand in yours, and kiss her on 
the forehead, and only once." 
their eyes met instead of their lips, and so they parted. lucy's eyes 
closed, and van helsing, who had been watching closely, took arthur's 
arm, and drew him away. 
and then lucy's breathing became stertorous again, and all at once it 
ceased. 
"it is all over," said van helsing. "she is dead!" 
i took arthur by the arm, and led him away to the drawing room, where 
he sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way 
that nearly broke me down to see. 
i went back to the room, and found van helsing looking at poor lucy, 
and his face was sterner than ever. some change had come over her 
body. death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and 
cheeks had recovered some of their flowing lines. even the lips had 
lost their deadly pallor. it was as if the blood, no longer needed 
for the working of the heart, had gone to make the harshness of death 
as little rude as might be. 
"we thought her dying whilst she slept, and sleeping when she died." 
i stood beside van helsing, and said, "ah well, poor girl, there is 
peace for her at last. it is the end!" 
he turned to me, and said with grave solemnity, "not so, alas! not 
so. it is only the beginning!" 
when i asked him what he meant, he only shook his head and answered, 
"we can do nothing as yet. wait and see." 
chapter 13 
dr. seward's diary-cont. 
the funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that lucy and 
her mother might be buried together. i attended to all the ghastly 
formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff was 
afflicted, or blessed, with something of his own obsequious suavity. 
even the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to 
me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had come out 
from the death chamber, 
"she makes a very beautiful corpse, sir. it's quite a privilege to 
attend on her. it's not too much to say that she will do credit to 
our establishment!" 
i noticed that van helsing never kept far away. this was possible 
from the disordered state of things in the household. there were no 
relatives at hand, and as arthur had to be back the next day to attend 
at his father's funeral, we were unable to notify any one who should 
have been bidden. under the circumstances, van helsing and i took it 
upon ourselves to examine papers, etc. he insisted upon looking over 
lucy's papers himself. i asked him why, for i feared that he, being a 
foreigner, might not be quite aware of english legal requirements, and 
so might in ignorance make some unnecessary trouble. 
he answered me, "i know, i know. you forget that i am a lawyer as 
well as a doctor. but this is not altogether for the law. you knew 
that, when you avoided the coroner. i have more than him to avoid. 
there may be papers more, such as this." 
as he spoke he took from his pocket book the memorandum which had been 
in lucy's breast, and which she had torn in her sleep. 
"when you find anything of the solicitor who is for the late mrs. 
westenra, seal all her papers, and write him tonight. for me, i watch 
here in the room and in miss lucy's old room all night, and i myself 
search for what may be. it is not well that her very thoughts go into 
the hands of strangers." 
i went on with my part of the work, and in another half hour had found 
the name and address of mrs. westenra's solicitor and had written to 
him. all the poor lady's papers were in order. explicit directions 
regarding the place of burial were given. i had hardly sealed the 
letter, when, to my surprise, van helsing walked into the room, 
saying, 
"can i help you friend john? i am free, and if i may, my service is 
to you." 
"have you got what you looked for?" i asked. 
to which he replied, "i did not look for any specific thing. i only 
hoped to find, and find i have, all that there was, only some letters 
and a few memoranda, and a diary new begun. but i have them here, and 
we shall for the present say nothing of them. i shall see that poor 
lad tomorrow evening, and, with his sanction, i shall use some." 
when we had finished the work in hand, he said to me, "and now, friend 
john, i think we may to bed. we want sleep, both you and i, and rest 
to recuperate. tomorrow we shall have much to do, but for the tonight 
there is no need of us. alas!" 
before turning in we went to look at poor lucy. the undertaker had 
certainly done his work well, for the room was turned into a small 
chapelle ardente. there was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers, 
and death was made as little repulsive as might be. the end of the 
winding sheet was laid over the face. when the professor bent over 
and turned it gently back, we both started at the beauty before us. 
the tall wax candles showing a sufficient light to note it well. all 
lucy's loveliness had come back to her in death, and the hours that 
had passed, instead of leaving traces of 'decay's effacing fingers', 
had but restored the beauty of life, till positively i could not 
believe my eyes that i was looking at a corpse. 
the professor looked sternly grave. he had not loved her as i had, 
and there was no need for tears in his eyes. he said to me, "remain 
till i return," and left the room. he came back with a handful of 
wild garlic from the box waiting in the hall, but which had not been 
opened, and placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the 
bed. then he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold 
crucifix, and placed it over the mouth. he restored the sheet to its 
place, and we came away. 
i was undressing in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the 
door, he entered, and at once began to speak. 
"tomorrow i want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem 
knives." 
"must we make an autopsy?" i asked. 
"yes and no. i want to operate, but not what you think. let me tell 
you now, but not a word to another. i want to cut off her head and 
take out her heart. ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! you, whom i 
have seen with no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and 
death that make the rest shudder. oh, but i must not forget, my dear 
friend john, that you loved her, and i have not forgotten it for is i 
that shall operate, and you must not help. i would like to do it 
tonight, but for arthur i must not. he will be free after his 
father's funeral tomorrow, and he will want to see her, to see it. 
then, when she is coffined ready for the next day, you and i shall 
come when all sleep. we shall unscrew the coffin lid, and shall do 
our operation, and then replace all, so that none know, save we 
alone." 
"but why do it at all? the girl is dead. why mutilate her poor body 
without need? and if there is no necessity for a post-mortem and 
nothing to gain by it, no good to her, to us, to science, to human 
knowledge, why do it? without such it is monstrous." 
for answer he put his hand on my shoulder, and said, with infinite 
tenderness, "friend john, i pity your poor bleeding heart, and i love 
you the more because it does so bleed. if i could, i would take on 
myself the burden that you do bear. but there are things that you 
know not, but that you shall know, and bless me for knowing, though 
they are not pleasant things. john, my child, you have been my friend 
now many years, and yet did you ever know me to do any without good 
cause? i may err, i am but man, but i believe in all i do. was it 
not for these causes that you send for me when the great trouble 
came? yes! were you not amazed, nay horrified, when i would not let 
arthur kiss his love, though she was dying, and snatched him away by 
all my strength? yes! and yet you saw how she thanked me, with her 
so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so weak, and she kiss my 
rough old hand and bless me? yes! and did you not hear me swear 
promise to her, that so she closed her eyes grateful? yes! 
"well, i have good reason now for all i want to do. you have for many 
years trust me. you have believe me weeks past, when there be things 
so strange that you might have well doubt. believe me yet a little, 
friend john. if you trust me not, then i must tell what i think, and 
that is not perhaps well. and if i work, as work i shall, no matter 
trust or no trust, without my friend trust in me, i work with heavy 
heart and feel oh so lonely when i want all help and courage that may 
be!" he paused a moment and went on solemnly, "friend john, there are 
strange and terrible days before us. let us not be two, but one, that 
so we work to a good end. will you not have faith in me?" 
i took his hand, and promised him. i held my door open as he went 
away, and watched him go to his room and close the door. as i stood 
without moving, i saw one of the maids pass silently along the 
passage, she had her back to me, so did not see me, and go into the 
room where lucy lay. the sight touched me. devotion is so rare, and 
we are so grateful to those who show it unasked to those we love. here 
was a poor girl putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of 
death to go watch alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so 
that the poor clay might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest. 
i must have slept long and soundly, for it was broad daylight when van 
helsing waked me by coming into my room. he came over to my bedside 
and said, "you need not trouble about the knives. we shall not do 
it." 
"why not?" i asked. for his solemnity of the night before had 
greatly impressed me. 
"because," he said sternly, "it is too late, or too early. see!" 
here he held up the little golden crucifix. 
"this was stolen in the night." 
"how stolen," i asked in wonder, "since you have it now?" 
"because i get it back from the worthless wretch who stole it, from 
the woman who robbed the dead and the living. her punishment will 
surely come, but not through me. she knew not altogether what she 
did, and thus unknowing, she only stole. now we must wait." he went 
away on the word, leaving me with a new mystery to think of, a new 
puzzle to grapple with. 
the forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the solicitor came, mr. 
marquand, of wholeman, sons, marquand & lidderdale. he was very 
genial and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off our 
hands all cares as to details. during lunch he told us that mrs. 
westenra had for some time expected sudden death from her heart, and 
had put her affairs in absolute order. he informed us that, with the 
exception of a certain entailed property of lucy's father which now, 
in default of direct issue, went back to a distant branch of the 
family, the whole estate, real and personal, was left absolutely to 
arthur holmwood. when he had told us so much he went on, 
"frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, 
and pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter 
either penniless or not so free as she should be to act regarding a 
matrimonial alliance. indeed, we pressed the matter so far that we 
almost came into collision, for she asked us if we were or were not 
prepared to carry out her wishes. of course, we had then no 
alternative but to accept. we were right in principle, and 
ninety-nine times out of a hundred we should have proved, by the logic 
of events, the accuracy of our judgment. 
"frankly, however, i must admit that in this case any other form of 
disposition would have rendered impossible the carrying out of her 
wishes. for by her predeceasing her daughter the latter would have 
come into possession of the property, and, even had she only survived 
her mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there were no 
will, and a will was a practical impossibility in such a case, have 
been treated at her decease as under intestacy. in which case lord 
godalming, though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the 
world. and the inheritors, being remote, would not be likely to 
abandon their just rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire 
stranger. i assure you, my dear sirs, i am rejoiced at the result, 
perfectly rejoiced." 
he was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part, in 
which he was officially interested, of so great a tragedy, was an 
object-lesson in the limitations of sympathetic understanding. 
he did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day and 
see lord godalming. his coming, however, had been a certain comfort 
to us, since it assured us that we should not have to dread hostile 
criticism as to any of our acts. arthur was expected at five o'clock, 
so a little before that time we visited the death chamber. it was so 
in very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. the 
undertaker, true to his craft, had made the best display he could of 
his goods, and there was a mortuary air about the place that lowered 
our spirits at once. 
van helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to, 
explaining that, as lord godalming was coming very soon, it would be 
less harrowing to his feelings to see all that was left of his fiancee 
quite alone. 
the undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity and exerted himself 
to restore things to the condition in which we left them the night 
before, so that when arthur came such shocks to his feelings as we 
could avoid were saved. 
poor fellow! he looked desperately sad and broken. even his stalwart 
manhood seemed to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of his 
much-tried emotions. he had, i knew, been very genuinely and 
devotedly attached to his father, and to lose him, and at such a time, 
was a bitter blow to him. with me he was warm as ever, and to van 
helsing he was sweetly courteous. but i could not help seeing that 
there was some constraint with him. the professor noticed it too, and 
motioned me to bring him upstairs. i did so, and left him at the door 
of the room, as i felt he would like to be quite alone with her, but 
he took my arm and led me in, saying huskily, 
"you loved her too, old fellow. she told me all about it, and there 
was no friend had a closer place in her heart than you. i don't know 
how to thank you for all you have done for her. i can't think 
yet . . ." 
here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round my shoulders and 
laid his head on my breast, crying, "oh, jack! jack! what shall i 
do? the whole of life seems gone from me all at once, and there is 
nothing in the wide world for me to live for." 
i comforted him as well as i could. in such cases men do not need 
much expression. a grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over 
the shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a 
man's heart. i stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and 
then i said softly to him, "come and look at her." 
together we moved over to the bed, and i lifted the lawn from her 
face. god! how beautiful she was. every hour seemed to be enhancing 
her loveliness. it frightened and amazed me somewhat. and as for 
arthur, he fell to trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as 
with an ague. at last, after a long pause, he said to me in a faint 
whisper, "jack, is she really dead?" 
i assured him sadly that it was so, and went on to suggest, for i felt 
that such a horrible doubt should not have life for a moment longer 
than i could help, that it often happened that after death faces 
become softened and even resolved into their youthful beauty, that 
this was especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or 
prolonged suffering. i seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and 
after kneeling beside the couch for a while and looking at her 
lovingly and long, he turned aside. i told him that that must be 
goodbye, as the coffin had to be prepared, so he went back and took 
her dead hand in his and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her 
forehead. he came away, fondly looking back over his shoulder at her 
as he came. 
i left him in the drawing room, and told van helsing that he had said 
goodbye, so the latter went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's 
men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. when 
he came out of the room again i told him of arthur's question, and he 
replied, "i am not surprised. just now i doubted for a moment 
myself!" 
we all dined together, and i could see that poor art was trying to 
make the best of things. van helsing had been silent all dinner time, 
but when we had lit our cigars he said, "lord . . ." but arthur 
interrupted him. 
"no, no, not that, for god's sake! not yet at any rate. forgive me, 
sir. i did not mean to speak offensively. it is only because my loss 
is so recent." 
the professor answered very sweetly, "i only used that name because i 
was in doubt. i must not call you 'mr.' and i have grown to love you, 
yes, my dear boy, to love you, as arthur." 
arthur held out his hand, and took the old man's warmly. "call me 
what you will," he said. "i hope i may always have the title of a 
friend. and let me say that i am at a loss for words to thank you for 
your goodness to my poor dear." he paused a moment, and went on, "i 
know that she understood your goodness even better than i do. and if 
i was rude or in any way wanting at that time you acted so, you 
remember"-the professor nodded-"you must forgive me." 
he answered with a grave kindness, "i know it was hard for you to 
quite trust me then, for to trust such violence needs to understand, 
and i take it that you do not, that you cannot, trust me now, for you 
do not yet understand. and there may be more times when i shall want 
you to trust when you cannot, and may not, and must not yet 
understand. but the time will come when your trust shall be whole and 
complete in me, and when you shall understand as though the sunlight 
himself shone through. then you shall bless me from first to last for 
your own sake, and for the sake of others, and for her dear sake to 
whom i swore to protect." 
"and indeed, indeed, sir," said arthur warmly. "i shall in all ways 
trust you. i know and believe you have a very noble heart, and you 
are jack's friend, and you were hers. you shall do what you like." 
the professor cleared his throat a couple of times, as though about to 
speak, and finally said, "may i ask you something now?" 
"certainly." 
"you know that mrs. westenra left you all her property?" 
"no, poor dear. i never thought of it." 
"and as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with it as you will. 
i want you to give me permission to read all miss lucy's papers and 
letters. believe me, it is no idle curiosity. i have a motive of 
which, be sure, she would have approved. i have them all here. i 
took them before we knew that all was yours, so that no strange hand 
might touch them, no strange eye look through words into her soul. i 
shall keep them, if i may. even you may not see them yet, but i shall 
keep them safe. no word shall be lost, and in the good time i shall 
give them back to you. it is a hard thing that i ask, but you will do 
it, will you not, for lucy's sake?" 
arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self, "dr. van helsing, you 
may do what you will. i feel that in saying this i am doing what my 
dear one would have approved. i shall not trouble you with questions 
till the time comes." 
the old professor stood up as he said solemnly, "and you are right. 
there will be pain for us all, but it will not be all pain, nor will 
this pain be the last. we and you too, you most of all, dear boy, 
will have to pass through the bitter water before we reach the sweet. 
but we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and do our duty, and all 
will be well!" 
i slept on a sofa in arthur's room that night. van helsing did not go 
to bed at all. he went to and fro, as if patroling the house, and was 
never out of sight of the room where lucy lay in her coffin, strewn 
with the wild garlic flowers, which sent through the odour of lily and 
rose, a heavy, overpowering smell into the night. 
mina harker's journal 
22 september.-in the train to exeter. jonathan sleeping. it seems 
only yesterday that the last entry was made, and yet how much between 
then, in whitby and all the world before me, jonathan away and no news 
of him, and now, married to jonathan, jonathan a solicitor, a partner, 
rich, master of his business, mr. hawkins dead and buried, and 
jonathan with another attack that may harm him. some day he may ask 
me about it. down it all goes. i am rusty in my shorthand, see what 
unexpected prosperity does for us, so it may be as well to freshen it 
up again with an exercise anyhow. 
the service was very simple and very solemn. there were only 
ourselves and the servants there, one or two old friends of his from 
exeter, his london agent, and a gentleman representing sir john 
paxton, the president of the incorporated law society. jonathan and i 
stood hand in hand, and we felt that our best and dearest friend was 
gone from us. 
we came back to town quietly, taking a bus to hyde park corner. 
jonathan thought it would interest me to go into the row for a while, 
so we sat down. but there were very few people there, and it was 
sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. it made us 
think of the empty chair at home. so we got up and walked down 
piccadilly. jonathan was holding me by the arm, the way he used to in 
the old days before i went to school. i felt it very improper, for 
you can't go on for some years teaching etiquette and decorum to other 
girls without the pedantry of it biting into yourself a bit. but it 
was jonathan, and he was my husband, and we didn't know anybody who 
saw us, and we didn't care if they did, so on we walked. i was 
looking at a very beautiful girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in 
a victoria outside guiliano's, when i felt jonathan clutch my arm so 
tight that he hurt me, and he said under his breath, "my god!" 
i am always anxious about jonathan, for i fear that some nervous fit 
may upset him again. so i turned to him quickly, and asked him what 
it was that disturbed him. 
he was very pale, and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror 
and half in amazement, he gazed at a tall, thin man, with a beaky nose 
and black moustache and pointed beard, who was also observing the 
pretty girl. he was looking at her so hard that he did not see either 
of us, and so i had a good view of him. his face was not a good 
face. it was hard, and cruel, and sensual, and big white teeth, that 
looked all the whiter because his lips were so red, were pointed like 
an animal's. jonathan kept staring at him, till i was afraid he would 
notice. i feared he might take it ill, he looked so fierce and nasty. 
i asked jonathan why he was disturbed, and he answered, evidently 
thinking that i knew as much about it as he did, "do you see who it 
is?" 
"no, dear," i said. "i don't know him, who is it?" his answer seemed 
to shock and thrill me, for it was said as if he did not know that it 
was me, mina, to whom he was speaking. "it is the man himself!" 
the poor dear was evidently terrified at something, very greatly 
terrified. i do believe that if he had not had me to lean on and to 
support him he would have sunk down. he kept staring. a man came out 
of the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to the lady, who then 
drove off. the dark man kept his eyes fixed on her, and when the 
carriage moved up piccadilly he followed in the same direction, and 
hailed a hansom. jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as if to 
himself, 
"i believe it is the count, but he has grown young. my god, if this 
be so! oh, my god! my god! if only i knew! if only i knew!" he was 
distressing himself so much that i feared to keep his mind on the 
subject by asking him any questions, so i remained silent. i drew 
away quietly, and he, holding my arm, came easily. we walked a little 
further, and then went in and sat for a while in the green park. it 
was a hot day for autumn, and there was a comfortable seat in a shady 
place. after a few minutes' staring at nothing, jonathan's eyes 
closed, and he went quickly into a sleep, with his head on my 
shoulder. i thought it was the best thing for him, so did not disturb 
him. in about twenty minutes he woke up, and said to me quite 
cheerfully, 
"why, mina, have i been asleep! oh, do forgive me for being so rude. 
come, and we'll have a cup of tea somewhere." 
he had evidently forgotten all about the dark stranger, as in his 
illness he had forgotten all that this episode had reminded him of. i 
don't like this lapsing into forgetfulness. it may make or continue 
some injury to the brain. i must not ask him, for fear i shall do 
more harm than good, but i must somehow learn the facts of his journey 
abroad. the time is come, i fear, when i must open the parcel, and 
know what is written. oh, jonathan, you will, i know, forgive me if i 
do wrong, but it is for your own dear sake. 
later.-a sad homecoming in every way, the house empty of the dear 
soul who was so good to us. jonathan still pale and dizzy under a 
slight relapse of his malady, and now a telegram from van helsing, 
whoever he may be. "you will be grieved to hear that mrs. westenra 
died five days ago, and that lucy died the day before yesterday. they 
were both buried today." 
oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! poor mrs. westenra! poor 
lucy! gone, gone, never to return to us! and poor, poor arthur, to 
have lost such a sweetness out of his life! god help us all to bear 
our troubles. 
dr. seward's diary-cont. 
22 september.-it is all over. arthur has gone back to ring, and has 
taken quincey morris with him. what a fine fellow is quincey! i 
believe in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about lucy's 
death as any of us, but he bore himself through it like a moral 
viking. if america can go on breeding men like that, she will be a 
power in the world indeed. van helsing is lying down, having a rest 
preparatory to his journey. he goes to amsterdam tonight, but says he 
returns tomorrow night, that he only wants to make some arrangements 
which can only be made personally. he is to stop with me then, if he 
can. he says he has work to do in london which may take him some 
time. poor old fellow! i fear that the strain of the past week has 
broken down even his iron strength. all the time of the burial he 
was, i could see, putting some terrible restraint on himself. when it 
was all over, we were standing beside arthur, who, poor fellow, was 
speaking of his part in the operation where his blood had been 
transfused to his lucy's veins. i could see van helsing's face grow 
white and purple by turns. arthur was saying that he felt since then 
as if they two had been really married, and that she was his wife in 
the sight of god. none of us said a word of the other operations, and 
none of us ever shall. arthur and quincey went away together to the 
station, and van helsing and i came on here. the moment we were alone 
in the carriage he gave way to a regular fit of hysterics. he has 
denied to me since that it was hysterics, and insisted that it was 
only his sense of humor asserting itself under very terrible 
conditions. he laughed till he cried, and i had to draw down the 
blinds lest any one should see us and misjudge. and then he cried, 
till he laughed again, and laughed and cried together, just as a woman 
does. i tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the 
circumstances, but it had no effect. men and women are so different 
in manifestations of nervous strength or weakness! then when his face 
grew grave and stern again i asked him why his mirth, and why at such 
a time. his reply was in a way characteristic of him, for it was 
logical and forceful and mysterious. he said, 
"ah, you don't comprehend, friend john. do not think that i am not 
sad, though i laugh. see, i have cried even when the laugh did choke 
me. but no more think that i am all sorry when i cry, for the laugh 
he come just the same. keep it always with you that laughter who 
knock at your door and say, 'may i come in?' is not true laughter. 
no! he is a king, and he come when and how he like. he ask no 
person, he choose no time of suitability. he say, 'i am here.' 
behold, in example i grieve my heart out for that so sweet young 
girl. i give my blood for her, though i am old and worn. i give my 
time, my skill, my sleep. i let my other sufferers want that she may 
have all. and yet i can laugh at her very grave, laugh when the clay 
from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'thud, 
thud!' to my heart, till it send back the blood from my cheek. my 
heart bleed for that poor boy, that dear boy, so of the age of mine 
own boy had i been so blessed that he live, and with his hair and eyes 
the same. 
"there, you know now why i love him so. and yet when he say things 
that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my father-heart 
yearn to him as to no other man, not even you, friend john, for we are 
more level in experiences than father and son, yet even at such a 
moment king laugh he come to me and shout and bellow in my ear, 'here i 
am! here i am!' till the blood come dance back and bring some of the 
sunshine that he carry with him to my cheek. oh, friend john, it is a 
strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and 
troubles. and yet when king laugh come, he make them all dance to the 
tune he play. bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard, and 
tears that burn as they fall, all dance together to the music that he 
make with that smileless mouth of him. and believe me, friend john, 
that he is good to come, and kind. ah, we men and women are like 
ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. then tears 
come, and like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps 
the strain become too great, and we break. but king laugh he come 
like the sunshine, and he ease off the strain again, and we bear to go 
on with our labor, what it may be." 
i did not like to wound him by pretending not to see his idea, but as 
i did not yet understand the cause of his laughter, i asked him. as 
he answered me his face grew stern, and he said in quite a different 
tone, 
"oh, it was the grim irony of it all, this so lovely lady garlanded 
with flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we wondered 
if she were truly dead, she laid in that so fine marble house in that 
lonely churchyard, where rest so many of her kin, laid there with the 
mother who loved her, and whom she loved, and that sacred bell going 
'toll! toll! toll!' so sad and slow, and those holy men, with the 
white garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the 
time their eyes never on the page, and all of us with the bowed head. 
and all for what? she is dead, so! is it not?" 
"well, for the life of me, professor," i said, "i can't see anything 
to laugh at in all that. why, your expression makes it a harder 
puzzle than before. but even if the burial service was comic, what 
about poor art and his trouble? why his heart was simply breaking." 
"just so. said he not that the transfusion of his blood to her veins 
had made her truly his bride?" 
"yes, and it was a sweet and comforting idea for him." 
"quite so. but there was a difficulty, friend john. if so that, then 
what about the others? ho, ho! then this so sweet maid is a 
polyandrist, and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but alive by 
church's law, though no wits, all gone, even i, who am faithful 
husband to this now-no-wife, am bigamist." 
"i don't see where the joke comes in there either!" i said, and i did 
not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. he 
laid his hand on my arm, and said, 
"friend john, forgive me if i pain. i showed not my feeling to others 
when it would wound, but only to you, my old friend, whom i can trust. 
if you could have looked into my heart then when i want to laugh, if 
you could have done so when the laugh arrived, if you could do so now, 
when king laugh have pack up his crown, and all that is to him, for he 
go far, far away from me, and for a long, long time, maybe you would 
perhaps pity me the most of all." 
i was touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked why. 
"because i know!" 
and now we are all scattered, and for many a long day loneliness will 
sit over our roofs with brooding wings. lucy lies in the tomb of her 
kin, a lordly death house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming 
london, where the air is fresh, and the sun rises over hampstead hill, 
and where wild flowers grow of their own accord. 
so i can finish this diary, and god only knows if i shall ever begin 
another. if i do, or if i even open this again, it will be to deal 
with different people and different themes, for here at the end, where 
the romance of my life is told, ere i go back to take up the thread of 
my life-work, i say sadly and without hope, "finis". 
the westminster gazette, 25 september a hampstead mystery 
the neighborhood of hampstead is just at present exercised 
with a series of events which seem to run on lines parallel 
to those of what was known to the writers of headlines as 
"the kensington horror," or "the stabbing woman," or "the 
woman in black." during the past two or three days several 
cases have occurred of young children straying from home or 
neglecting to return from their playing on the heath. in 
all these cases the children were too young to give any 
properly intelligible account of themselves, but the 
consensus of their excuses is that they had been with a 
"bloofer lady." it has always been late in the evening when 
they have been missed, and on two occasions the children 
have not been found until early in the following morning. 
it is generally supposed in the neighborhood that, as the 
first child missed gave as his reason for being away that a 
"bloofer lady" had asked him to come for a walk, the others 
had picked up the phrase and used it as occasion served. this 
is the more natural as the favourite game of the little ones 
at present is luring each other away by wiles. a correspondent 
writes us that to see some of the tiny tots pretending to be the 
"bloofer lady" is supremely funny. some of our caricaturists 
might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by 
comparing the reality and the picture. it is only in accordance 
with general principles of human nature that the "bloofer lady" 
should be the popular role at these al fresco performances. our 
correspondent naively says that even ellen terry could not be so 
winningly attractive as some of these grubby-faced little 
children pretend, and even imagine themselves, to be. 
there is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, 
for some of the children, indeed all who have been missed 
at night, have been slightly torn or wounded in the throat. 
the wounds seem such as might be made by a rat or a small 
dog, and although of not much importance individually, would tend 
to show that whatever animal inflicts them has a system or method 
of its own. the police of the division have been instructed to 
keep a sharp lookout for straying children, especially when very 
young, in and around hampstead heath, and for any stray dog which 
may be about. 
the westminster gazette, 25 september extra special 
the hampstead horror 
another child injured 
the "bloofer lady" 
we have just received intelligence that another child, 
missed last night, was only discovered late in the morning 
under a furze bush at the shooter's hill side of hampstead 
heath, which is perhaps, less frequented than the other 
parts. it has the same tiny wound in the throat as has 
been noticed in other cases. it was terribly weak, and 
looked quite emaciated. it too, when partially restored, 
had the common story to tell of being lured away by the 
"bloofer lady". 
chapter 14 
mina harker's journal 
23 september.-jonathan is better after a bad night. i am so glad 
that he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps his mind off the 
terrible things, and oh, i am rejoiced that he is not now weighed down 
with the responsibility of his new position. i knew he would be true 
to himself, and now how proud i am to see my jonathan rising to the 
height of his advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties 
that come upon him. he will be away all day till late, for he said he 
could not lunch at home. my household work is done, so i shall take 
his foreign journal, and lock myself up in my room and read it. 
24 september.-i hadn't the heart to write last night, that terrible 
record of jonathan's upset me so. poor dear! how he must have 
suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. i wonder if there 
is any truth in it at all. did he get his brain fever, and then write 
all those terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? i suppose 
i shall never know, for i dare not open the subject to him. and yet 
that man we saw yesterday! he seemed quite certain of him, poor 
fellow! i suppose it was the funeral upset him and sent his mind back 
on some train of thought. 
he believes it all himself. i remember how on our wedding day he said 
"unless some solemn duty come upon me to go back to the bitter hours, 
asleep or awake, mad or sane . . ." there seems to be through it all 
some thread of continuity. that fearful count was coming to london. 
if it should be, and he came to london, with its teeming millions . . . 
there may be a solemn duty, and if it come we must not shrink from 
it. i shall be prepared. i shall get my typewriter this very hour 
and begin transcribing. then we shall be ready for other eyes if 
required. and if it be wanted, then, perhaps, if i am ready, poor 
jonathan may not be upset, for i can speak for him and never let him 
be troubled or worried with it at all. if ever jonathan quite gets 
over the nervousness he may want to tell me of it all, and i can ask 
him questions and find out things, and see how i may comfort him. 
letter, van helsing to mrs. harker 
24 september 
(confidence) 
"dear madam, 
"i pray you to pardon my writing, in that i am so far 
friend as that i sent to you sad news of miss lucy 
westenra's death. by the kindness of lord godalming, i am 
empowered to read her letters and papers, for i am deeply 
concerned about certain matters vitally important. in them 
i find some letters from you, which show how great friends 
you were and how you love her. oh, madam mina, by that 
love, i implore you, help me. it is for others' good that 
i ask, to redress great wrong, and to lift much and terrible 
troubles, that may be more great than you can know. may it be 
that i see you? you can trust me. i am friend of dr. john 
seward and of lord godalming (that was arthur of miss lucy). i 
must keep it private for the present from all. i should come to 
exeter to see you at once if you tell me i am privilege to come, 
and where and when. i implore your pardon, madam. i have read 
your letters to poor lucy, and know how good you are and how your 
husband suffer. so i pray you, if it may be, enlighten him not, 
least it may harm. again your pardon, and forgive me. 
"van helsing" 
telegram, mrs. harker to van helsing 
25 september.-come today by quarter past ten train if you 
can catch it. can see you any time you call. 
"wilhelmina harker" 
mina harker's journal 
25 september.-i cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time 
draws near for the visit of dr. van helsing, for somehow i expect that 
it will throw some light upon jonathan's sad experience, and as he 
attended poor dear lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about 
her. that is the reason of his coming. it is concerning lucy and her 
sleep-walking, and not about jonathan. then i shall never know the 
real truth now! how silly i am. that awful journal gets hold of my 
imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour. of 
course it is about lucy. that habit came back to the poor dear, and 
that awful night on the cliff must have made her ill. i had almost 
forgotten in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. she must have 
told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that i knew 
all about it, and now he wants me to tell him what i know, so that he 
may understand. i hope i did right in not saying anything of it to 
mrs. westenra. i should never forgive myself if any act of mine, were 
it even a negative one, brought harm on poor dear lucy. i hope too, 
dr. van helsing will not blame me. i have had so much trouble and 
anxiety of late that i feel i cannot bear more just at present. 
i suppose a cry does us all good at times, clears the air as other 
rain does. perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset 
me, and then jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me a 
whole day and night, the first time we have been parted since our 
marriage. i do hope the dear fellow will take care of himself, and 
that nothing will occur to upset him. it is two o'clock, and the 
doctor will be here soon now. i shall say nothing of jonathan's 
journal unless he asks me. i am so glad i have typewritten out my own 
journal, so that, in case he asks about lucy, i can hand it to him. 
it will save much questioning. 
later.-he has come and gone. oh, what a strange meeting, and how it 
all makes my head whirl round. i feel like one in a dream. can it be 
all possible, or even a part of it? if i had not read jonathan's 
journal first, i should never have accepted even a possibility. poor, 
poor, dear jonathan! how he must have suffered. please the good god, 
all this may not upset him again. i shall try to save him from it. 
but it may be even a consolation and a help to him, terrible though it 
be and awful in its consequences, to know for certain that his eyes 
and ears and brain did not deceive him, and that it is all true. it 
may be that it is the doubt which haunts him, that when the doubt is 
removed, no matter which, waking or dreaming, may prove the truth, he 
will be more satisfied and better able to bear the shock. dr. van 
helsing must be a good man as well as a clever one if he is arthur's 
friend and dr. seward's, and if they brought him all the way from 
holland to look after lucy. i feel from having seen him that he is 
good and kind and of a noble nature. when he comes tomorrow i shall 
ask him about jonathan. and then, please god, all this sorrow and 
anxiety may lead to a good end. i used to think i would like to 
practice interviewing. jonathan's friend on "the exeter news" told 
him that memory is everything in such work, that you must be able to 
put down exactly almost every word spoken, even if you had to refine 
some of it afterwards. here was a rare interview. i shall try to 
record it verbatim. 
it was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. i took my courage a 
deux mains and waited. in a few minutes mary opened the door, and 
announced "dr. van helsing". 
i rose and bowed, and he came towards me, a man of medium weight, 
strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest 
and a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is on the neck. the 
poise of the head strikes me at once as indicative of thought and 
power. the head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the 
ears. the face, clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large 
resolute, mobile mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with 
quick, sensitive nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big bushy brows 
come down and the mouth tightens. the forehead is broad and fine, 
rising at first almost straight and then sloping back above two bumps 
or ridges wide apart, such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot 
possibly tumble over it, but falls naturally back and to the sides. 
big, dark blue eyes are set widely apart, and are quick and tender or 
stern with the man's moods. he said to me, 
"mrs. harker, is it not?" i bowed assent. 
"that was miss mina murray?" again i assented. 
"it is mina murray that i came to see that was friend of that poor dear 
child lucy westenra. madam mina, it is on account of the dead that i 
come." 
"sir," i said, "you could have no better claim on me than that you 
were a friend and helper of lucy westenra." and i held out my hand. 
he took it and said tenderly, 
"oh, madam mina, i know that the friend of that poor little girl must 
be good, but i had yet to learn . . ." he finished his speech with a 
courtly bow. i asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about, 
so he at once began. 
"i have read your letters to miss lucy. forgive me, but i had to 
begin to inquire somewhere, and there was none to ask. i know that 
you were with her at whitby. she sometimes kept a diary, you need not 
look surprised, madam mina. it was begun after you had left, and was 
an imitation of you, and in that diary she traces by inference certain 
things to a sleep-walking in which she puts down that you saved her. 
in great perplexity then i come to you, and ask you out of your so 
much kindness to tell me all of it that you can remember." 
"i can tell you, i think, dr. van helsing, all about it." 
"ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? it is not 
always so with young ladies." 
"no, doctor, but i wrote it all down at the time. i can show it to 
you if you like." 
"oh, madam mina, i well be grateful. you will do me much favour." 
i could not resist the temptation of mystifying him a bit, i suppose 
it is some taste of the original apple that remains still in our 
mouths, so i handed him the shorthand diary. he took it with a 
grateful bow, and said, "may i read it?" 
"if you wish," i answered as demurely as i could. he opened it, and 
for an instant his face fell. then he stood up and bowed. 
"oh, you so clever woman!" he said. "i knew long that mr. jonathan 
was a man of much thankfulness, but see, his wife have all the good 
things. and will you not so much honour me and so help me as to read 
it for me? alas! i know not the shorthand." 
by this time my little joke was over, and i was almost ashamed. so i 
took the typewritten copy from my work basket and handed it to him. 
"forgive me," i said. "i could not help it, but i had been thinking 
that it was of dear lucy that you wished to ask, and so that you might 
not have time to wait, not on my account, but because i know your time 
must be precious, i have written it out on the typewriter for you." 
he took it and his eyes glistened. "you are so good," he said. "and 
may i read it now? i may want to ask you some things when i have 
read." 
"by all means," i said, "read it over whilst i order lunch, and then 
you can ask me questions whilst we eat." 
he bowed and settled himself in a chair with his back to the light, 
and became so absorbed in the papers, whilst i went to see after lunch 
chiefly in order that he might not be disturbed. when i came back, i 
found him walking hurriedly up and down the room, his face all ablaze 
with excitement. he rushed up to me and took me by both hands. 
"oh, madam mina," he said, "how can i say what i owe to you? this 
paper is as sunshine. it opens the gate to me. i am dazed, i am 
dazzled, with so much light, and yet clouds roll in behind the light 
every time. but that you do not, cannot comprehend. oh, but i am 
grateful to you, you so clever woman. madame," he said this very 
solemnly, "if ever abraham van helsing can do anything for you or 
yours, i trust you will let me know. it will be pleasure and delight 
if i may serve you as a friend, as a friend, but all i have ever 
learned, all i can ever do, shall be for you and those you love. there 
are darknesses in life, and there are lights. you are one of the 
lights. you will have a happy life and a good life, and your husband 
will be blessed in you." 
"but, doctor, you praise me too much, and you do not know me." 
"not know you, i, who am old, and who have studied all my life men and 
women, i who have made my specialty the brain and all that belongs to 
him and all that follow from him! and i have read your diary that you 
have so goodly written for me, and which breathes out truth in every 
line. i, who have read your so sweet letter to poor lucy of your 
marriage and your trust, not know you! oh, madam mina, good women 
tell all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such 
things that angels can read. and we men who wish to know have in us 
something of angels' eyes. your husband is noble nature, and you are 
noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean 
nature. and your husband, tell me of him. is he quite well? is all 
that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" 
i saw here an opening to ask him about jonathan, so i said, "he was 
almost recovered, but he has been greatly upset by mr. hawkins death." 
he interrupted, "oh, yes. i know. i know. i have read your last two 
letters." 
i went on, "i suppose this upset him, for when we were in town on 
thursday last he had a sort of shock." 
"a shock, and after brain fever so soon! that is not good. what kind 
of shock was it?" 
"he thought he saw some one who recalled something terrible, something 
which led to his brain fever." and here the whole thing seemed to 
overwhelm me in a rush. the pity for jonathan, the horror which he 
experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that 
has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. i suppose 
i was hysterical, for i threw myself on my knees and held up my hands 
to him, and implored him to make my husband well again. he took my 
hands and raised me up, and made me sit on the sofa, and sat by me. he 
held my hand in his, and said to me with, oh, such infinite sweetness, 
"my life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of work that i have 
not had much time for friendships, but since i have been summoned to 
here by my friend john seward i have known so many good people and 
seen such nobility that i feel more than ever, and it has grown with 
my advancing years, the loneliness of my life. believe me, then, that 
i come here full of respect for you, and you have given me hope, hope, 
not in what i am seeking of, but that there are good women still left 
to make life happy, good women, whose lives and whose truths may make 
good lesson for the children that are to be. i am glad, glad, that i 
may here be of some use to you. for if your husband suffer, he suffer 
within the range of my study and experience. i promise you that i 
will gladly do all for him that i can, all to make his life strong and 
manly, and your life a happy one. now you must eat. you are 
overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. husband jonathan would not like 
to see you so pale, and what he like not where he love, is not to his 
good. therefore for his sake you must eat and smile. you have told 
me about lucy, and so now we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. 
i shall stay in exeter tonight, for i want to think much over what you 
have told me, and when i have thought i will ask you questions, if i 
may. and then too, you will tell me of husband jonathan's trouble so 
far as you can, but not yet. you must eat now, afterwards you shall 
tell me all." 
after lunch, when we went back to the drawing room, he said to me, 
"and now tell me all about him." 
when it came to speaking to this great learned man, i began to fear 
that he would think me a weak fool, and jonathan a madman, that 
journal is all so strange, and i hesitated to go on. but he was so 
sweet and kind, and he had promised to help, and i trusted him, so i 
said, 
"dr. van helsing, what i have to tell you is so queer that you must 
not laugh at me or at my husband. i have been since yesterday in a 
sort of fever of doubt. you must be kind to me, and not think me 
foolish that i have even half believed some very strange things." 
he reassured me by his manner as well as his words when he said, "oh, 
my dear, if you only know how strange is the matter regarding which i 
am here, it is you who would laugh. i have learned not to think 
little of any one's belief, no matter how strange it may be. i have 
tried to keep an open mind, and it is not the ordinary things of life 
that could close it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, 
the things that make one doubt if they be mad or sane." 
"thank you, thank you a thousand times! you have taken a weight off my 
mind. if you will let me, i shall give you a paper to read. it is 
long, but i have typewritten it out. it will tell you my trouble and 
jonathan's. it is the copy of his journal when abroad, and all that 
happened. i dare not say anything of it. you will read for yourself 
and judge. and then when i see you, perhaps, you will be very kind 
and tell me what you think." 
"i promise," he said as i gave him the papers. "i shall in the 
morning, as soon as i can, come to see you and your husband, if i 
may." 
"jonathan will be here at half-past eleven, and you must come to lunch 
with us and see him then. you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which 
will leave you at paddington before eight." he was surprised at my 
knowledge of the trains offhand, but he does not know that i have made 
up all the trains to and from exeter, so that i may help jonathan in 
case he is in a hurry. 
so he took the papers with him and went away, and i sit here thinking, 
thinking i don't know what. 
letter (by hand), van helsing to mrs. harker 
25 september, 6 o'clock 
"dear madam mina, 
"i have read your husband's so wonderful diary. you may 
sleep without doubt. strange and terrible as it is, it is 
true! i will pledge my life on it. it may be worse for 
others, but for him and you there is no dread. he is a 
noble fellow, and let me tell you from experience of men, 
that one who would do as he did in going down that wall and 
to that room, aye, and going a second time, is not one to 
be injured in permanence by a shock. his brain and his 
heart are all right, this i swear, before i have even seen 
him, so be at rest. i shall have much to ask him of other 
things. i am blessed that today i come to see you, for i 
have learn all at once so much that again i am dazzled, 
dazzled more than ever, and i must think. 
"yours the most faithful, 
"abraham van helsing." 
letter, mrs. harker to van helsing 
25 september, 6:30 p.m. 
"my dear dr. van helsing, 
"a thousand thanks for your kind letter, which has taken a 
great weight off my mind. and yet, if it be true, what 
terrible things there are in the world, and what an awful 
thing if that man, that monster, be really in london! i 
fear to think. i have this moment, whilst writing, had a 
wire from jonathan, saying that he leaves by the 6:25 tonight 
from launceston and will be here at 10:18, so that i shall have 
no fear tonight. will you, therefore, instead of lunching with 
us, please come to breakfast at eight o'clock, if this be not too 
early for you? you can get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 
10:30 train, which will bring you to paddington by 2:35. do not 
answer this, as i shall take it that, if i do not hear, you will 
come to breakfast. 
"believe me, 
"your faithful and grateful friend, 
"mina harker." 
jonathan harker's journal 
26 september.-i thought never to write in this diary again, but the 
time has come. when i got home last night mina had supper ready, and 
when we had supped she told me of van helsing's visit, and of her 
having given him the two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she 
has been about me. she showed me in the doctor's letter that all i 
wrote down was true. it seems to have made a new man of me. it was 
the doubt as to the reality of the whole thing that knocked me over. 
i felt impotent, and in the dark, and distrustful. but, now that i 
know, i am not afraid, even of the count. he has succeeded after all, 
then, in his design in getting to london, and it was he i saw. he has 
got younger, and how? van helsing is the man to unmask him and hunt 
him out, if he is anything like what mina says. we sat late, and 
talked it over. mina is dressing, and i shall call at the hotel in a 
few minutes and bring him over. 
he was, i think, surprised to see me. when i came into the room where 
he was, and introduced myself, he took me by the shoulder, and turned 
my face round to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny, 
"but madam mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock." 
it was so funny to hear my wife called 'madam mina' by this kindly, 
strong-faced old man. i smiled, and said, "i was ill, i have had a 
shock, but you have cured me already." 
"and how?" 
"by your letter to mina last night. i was in doubt, and then 
everything took a hue of unreality, and i did not know what to trust, 
even the evidence of my own senses. not knowing what to trust, i did 
not know what to do, and so had only to keep on working in what had 
hitherto been the groove of my life. the groove ceased to avail me, 
and i mistrusted myself. doctor, you don't know what it is to doubt 
everything, even yourself. no, you don't, you couldn't with eyebrows 
like yours." 
he seemed pleased, and laughed as he said, "so! you are a 
physiognomist. i learn more here with each hour. i am with so much 
pleasure coming to you to breakfast, and, oh, sir, you will pardon 
praise from an old man, but you are blessed in your wife." 
i would listen to him go on praising mina for a day, so i simply 
nodded and stood silent. 
"she is one of god's women, fashioned by his own hand to show us men 
and other women that there is a heaven where we can enter, and that 
its light can be here on earth. so true, so sweet, so noble, so 
little an egoist, and that, let me tell you, is much in this age, so 
sceptical and selfish. and you, sir . . . i have read all the letters 
to poor miss lucy, and some of them speak of you, so i know you since 
some days from the knowing of others, but i have seen your true self 
since last night. you will give me your hand, will you not? and let 
us be friends for all our lives." 
we shook hands, and he was so earnest and so kind that it made me 
quite choky. 
"and now," he said, "may i ask you for some more help? i have a great 
task to do, and at the beginning it is to know. you can help me 
here. can you tell me what went before your going to transylvania? 
later on i may ask more help, and of a different kind, but at first 
this will do." 
"look here, sir," i said, "does what you have to do concern the 
count?" 
"it does," he said solemnly. 
"then i am with you heart and soul. as you go by the 10:30 train, you 
will not have time to read them, but i shall get the bundle of papers. 
you can take them with you and read them in the train." 
after breakfast i saw him to the station. when we were parting he 
said, "perhaps you will come to town if i send for you, and take madam 
mina too." 
"we shall both come when you will," i said. 
i had got him the morning papers and the london papers of the previous 
night, and while we were talking at the carriage window, waiting for 
the train to start, he was turning them over. his eyes suddenly 
seemed to catch something in one of them, "the westminster gazette", i 
knew it by the colour, and he grew quite white. he read something 
intently, groaning to himself, "mein gott! mein gott! so soon! so 
soon!" i do not think he remembered me at the moment. just then the 
whistle blew, and the train moved off. this recalled him to himself, 
and he leaned out of the window and waved his hand, calling out, "love 
to madam mina. i shall write so soon as ever i can." 
dr. seward's diary 
26 september.-truly there is no such thing as finality. not a week 
since i said "finis," and yet here i am starting fresh again, or 
rather going on with the record. until this afternoon i had no cause 
to think of what is done. renfield had become, to all intents, as 
sane as he ever was. he was already well ahead with his fly business, 
and he had just started in the spider line also, so he had not been of 
any trouble to me. i had a letter from arthur, written on sunday, and 
from it i gather that he is bearing up wonderfully well. quincey 
morris is with him, and that is much of a help, for he himself is a 
bubbling well of good spirits. quincey wrote me a line too, and from 
him i hear that arthur is beginning to recover something of his old 
buoyancy, so as to them all my mind is at rest. as for myself, i was 
settling down to my work with the enthusiasm which i used to have for 
it, so that i might fairly have said that the wound which poor lucy 
left on me was becoming cicatrised. 
everything is, however, now reopened, and what is to be the end god 
only knows. i have an idea that van helsing thinks he knows, too, but 
he will only let out enough at a time to whet curiosity. he went to 
exeter yesterday, and stayed there all night. today he came back, and 
almost bounded into the room at about half-past five o'clock, and 
thrust last night's "westminster gazette" into my hand. 
"what do you think of that?" he asked as he stood back and folded his 
arms. 
i looked over the paper, for i really did not know what he meant, but 
he took it from me and pointed out a paragraph about children being 
decoyed away at hampstead. it did not convey much to me, until i 
reached a passage where it described small puncture wounds on their 
throats. an idea struck me, and i looked up. 
"well?" he said. 
"it is like poor lucy's." 
"and what do you make of it?" 
"simply that there is some cause in common. whatever it was that 
injured her has injured them." i did not quite understand his answer. 
"that is true indirectly, but not directly." 
"how do you mean, professor?" i asked. i was a little inclined to 
take his seriousness lightly, for, after all, four days of rest and 
freedom from burning, harrowing, anxiety does help to restore one's 
spirits, but when i saw his face, it sobered me. never, even in the 
midst of our despair about poor lucy, had he looked more stern. 
"tell me!" i said. "i can hazard no opinion. i do not know what to 
think, and i have no data on which to found a conjecture." 
"do you mean to tell me, friend john, that you have no suspicion as to 
what poor lucy died of, not after all the hints given, not only by 
events, but by me?" 
"of nervous prostration following a great loss or waste of blood." 
"and how was the blood lost or wasted?" i shook my head. 
he stepped over and sat down beside me, and went on, "you are a clever 
man, friend john. you reason well, and your wit is bold, but you are 
too prejudiced. you do not let your eyes see nor your ears hear, and 
that which is outside your daily life is not of account to you. do 
you not think that there are things which you cannot understand, and 
yet which are, that some people see things that others cannot? but 
there are things old and new which must not be contemplated by men's 
eyes, because they know, or think they know, some things which other 
men have told them. ah, it is the fault of our science that it wants 
to explain all, and if it explain not, then it says there is nothing 
to explain. but yet we see around us every day the growth of new 
beliefs, which think themselves new, and which are yet but the old, 
which pretend to be young, like the fine ladies at the opera. i 
suppose now you do not believe in corporeal transference. no? nor in 
materialization. no? nor in astral bodies. no? nor in the reading 
of thought. no? nor in hypnotism . . ." 
"yes," i said. "charcot has proved that pretty well." 
he smiled as he went on, "then you are satisfied as to it. yes? and 
of course then you understand how it act, and can follow the mind of 
the great charcot, alas that he is no more, into the very soul of the 
patient that he influence. no? then, friend john, am i to take it 
that you simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to 
conclusion be a blank? no? then tell me, for i am a student of the 
brain, how you accept hypnotism and reject the thought reading. let 
me tell you, my friend, that there are things done today in electrical 
science which would have been deemed unholy by the very man who 
discovered electricity, who would themselves not so long before been 
burned as wizards. there are always mysteries in life. why was it 
that methuselah lived nine hundred years, and 'old parr' one hundred 
and sixty-nine, and yet that poor lucy, with four men's blood in her 
poor veins, could not live even one day? for, had she live one more 
day, we could save her. do you know all the mystery of life and 
death? do you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say 
wherefore the qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in others? 
can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one 
great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old spanish 
church and grew and grew, till, on descending, he could drink the oil 
of all the church lamps? can you tell me why in the pampas, ay and 
elsewhere, there are bats that come out at night and open the veins of 
cattle and horses and suck dry their veins, how in some islands of the 
western seas there are bats which hang on the trees all day, and those 
who have seen describe as like giant nuts or pods, and that when the 
sailors sleep on the deck, because that it is hot, flit down on them 
and then, and then in the morning are found dead men, white as even 
miss lucy was?" 
"good god, professor!" i said, starting up. "do you mean to tell me 
that lucy was bitten by such a bat, and that such a thing is here in 
london in the nineteenth century?" 
he waved his hand for silence, and went on, "can you tell me why the 
tortoise lives more long than generations of men, why the elephant 
goes on and on till he have sees dynasties, and why the parrot never 
die only of bite of cat of dog or other complaint? can you tell me 
why men believe in all ages and places that there are men and women 
who cannot die? we all know, because science has vouched for the 
fact, that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of 
years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of 
the world. can you tell me how the indian fakir can make himself to 
die and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, 
and the corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and 
then men come and take away the unbroken seal and that there lie the 
indian fakir, not dead, but that rise up and walk amongst them as 
before?" 
here i interrupted him. i was getting bewildered. he so crowded on 
my mind his list of nature's eccentricities and possible 
impossibilities that my imagination was getting fired. i had a dim 
idea that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to do in 
his study at amsterdam. but he used them to tell me the thing, so 
that i could have the object of thought in mind all the time. but now 
i was without his help, yet i wanted to follow him, so i said, 
"professor, let me be your pet student again. tell me the thesis, so 
that i may apply your knowledge as you go on. at present i am going 
in my mind from point to point as a madman, and not a sane one, 
follows an idea. i feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a 
midst, jumping from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to 
move on without knowing where i am going." 
"that is a good image," he said. "well, i shall tell you. my thesis 
is this, i want you to believe." 
"to believe what?" 
"to believe in things that you cannot. let me illustrate. i heard 
once of an american who so defined faith, 'that faculty which enables 
us to believe things which we know to be untrue.' for one, i follow 
that man. he meant that we shall have an open mind, and not let a 
little bit of truth check the rush of the big truth, like a small rock 
does a railway truck. we get the small truth first. good! we keep 
him, and we value him, but all the same we must not let him think 
himself all the truth in the universe." 
"then you want me not to let some previous conviction inure the 
receptivity of my mind with regard to some strange matter. do i read 
your lesson aright?" 
"ah, you are my favourite pupil still. it is worth to teach you. now 
that you are willing to understand, you have taken the first step to 
understand. you think then that those so small holes in the 
children's throats were made by the same that made the holes in miss 
lucy?" 
"i suppose so." 
he stood up and said solemnly, "then you are wrong. oh, would it were 
so! but alas! no. it is worse, far, far worse." 
"in god's name, professor van helsing, what do you mean?" i cried. 
he threw himself with a despairing gesture into a chair, and placed 
his elbows on the table, covering his face with his hands as he spoke. 
"they were made by miss lucy!" 
chapter 15 
dr. seward's diary-cont. 
for a while sheer anger mastered me. it was as if he had during her 
life struck lucy on the face. i smote the table hard and rose up as i 
said to him, "dr. van helsing, are you mad?" 
he raised his head and looked at me, and somehow the tenderness of his 
face calmed me at once. "would i were!" he said. "madness were easy 
to bear compared with truth like this. oh, my friend, why, think 
you, did i go so far round, why take so long to tell so simple a 
thing? was it because i hate you and have hated you all my life? was 
it because i wished to give you pain? was it that i wanted, now so 
late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a fearful 
death? ah no!" 
"forgive me," said i. 
he went on, "my friend, it was because i wished to be gentle in the 
breaking to you, for i know you have loved that so sweet lady. but 
even yet i do not expect you to believe. it is so hard to accept at 
once any abstract truth, that we may doubt such to be possible when we 
have always believed the 'no' of it. it is more hard still to accept 
so sad a concrete truth, and of such a one as miss lucy. tonight i go 
to prove it. dare you come with me?" 
this staggered me. a man does not like to prove such a truth, byron 
excepted from the category, jealousy. 
"and prove the very truth he most abhorred." 
he saw my hesitation, and spoke, "the logic is simple, no madman's 
logic this time, jumping from tussock to tussock in a misty bog. if 
it not be true, then proof will be relief. at worst it will not harm. 
if it be true! ah, there is the dread. yet every dread should help my 
cause, for in it is some need of belief. come, i tell you what i 
propose. first, that we go off now and see that child in the 
hospital. dr. vincent, of the north hospital, where the papers say 
the child is, is a friend of mine, and i think of yours since you were 
in class at amsterdam. he will let two scientists see his case, if he 
will not let two friends. we shall tell him nothing, but only that we 
wish to learn. and then . . ." 
"and then?" 
he took a key from his pocket and held it up. "and then we spend the 
night, you and i, in the churchyard where lucy lies. this is the key 
that lock the tomb. i had it from the coffin man to give to arthur." 
my heart sank within me, for i felt that there was some fearful ordeal 
before us. i could do nothing, however, so i plucked up what heart i 
could and said that we had better hasten, as the afternoon was 
passing. 
we found the child awake. it had had a sleep and taken some food, and 
altogether was going on well. dr. vincent took the bandage from its 
throat, and showed us the punctures. there was no mistaking the 
similarity to those which had been on lucy's throat. they were 
smaller, and the edges looked fresher, that was all. we asked vincent 
to what he attributed them, and he replied that it must have been a 
bite of some animal, perhaps a rat, but for his own part, he was 
inclined to think it was one of the bats which are so numerous on the 
northern heights of london. "out of so many harmless ones," he said, 
"there may be some wild specimen from the south of a more malignant 
species. some sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to 
escape, or even from the zoological gardens a young one may have got 
loose, or one be bred there from a vampire. these things do occur, 
you, know. only ten days ago a wolf got out, and was, i believe, 
traced up in this direction. for a week after, the children were 
playing nothing but red riding hood on the heath and in every alley in 
the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since then it 
has been quite a gala time with them. even this poor little mite, 
when he woke up today, asked the nurse if he might go away. when she 
asked him why he wanted to go, he said he wanted to play with the 
'bloofer lady'." 
"i hope," said van helsing, "that when you are sending the child home 
you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. these 
fancies to stray are most dangerous, and if the child were to remain 
out another night, it would probably be fatal. but in any case i 
suppose you will not let it away for some days?" 
"certainly not, not for a week at least, longer if the wound is not 
healed." 
our visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and 
the sun had dipped before we came out. when van helsing saw how dark 
it was, he said, 
"there is not hurry. it is more late than i thought. come, let us 
seek somewhere that we may eat, and then we shall go on our way." 
we dined at 'jack straw's castle' along with a little crowd of 
bicyclists and others who were genially noisy. about ten o'clock we 
started from the inn. it was then very dark, and the scattered lamps 
made the darkness greater when we were once outside their individual 
radius. the professor had evidently noted the road we were to go, for 
he went on unhesitatingly, but, as for me, i was in quite a mixup as 
to locality. as we went further, we met fewer and fewer people, till 
at last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the patrol of 
horse police going their usual suburban round. at last we reached the 
wall of the churchyard, which we climbed over. with some little 
difficulty, for it was very dark, and the whole place seemed so 
strange to us, we found the westenra tomb. the professor took the 
key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite 
unconsciously, motioned me to precede him. there was a delicious 
irony in the offer, in the courtliness of giving preference on such a 
ghastly occasion. my companion followed me quickly, and cautiously 
drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a 
falling, and not a spring one. in the latter case we should have been 
in a bad plight. then he fumbled in his bag, and taking out a 
matchbox and a piece of candle, proceeded to make a light. the tomb 
in the daytime, and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim 
and gruesome enough, but now, some days afterwards, when the flowers 
hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust and their greens to 
browns, when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed 
dominance, when the time-discoloured stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, 
and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating 
gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle, the effect was more 
miserable and sordid than could have been imagined. it conveyed 
irresistibly the idea that life, animal life, was not the only thing 
which could pass away. 
van helsing went about his work systematically. holding his candle so 
that he could read the coffin plates, and so holding it that the sperm 
dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he 
made assurance of lucy's coffin. another search in his bag, and he 
took out a turnscrew. 
"what are you going to do?" i asked. 
"to open the coffin. you shall yet be convinced." 
straightway he began taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the 
lid, showing the casing of lead beneath. the sight was almost too 
much for me. it seemed to be as much an affront to the dead as it 
would have been to have stripped off her clothing in her sleep whilst 
living. i actually took hold of his hand to stop him. 
he only said, "you shall see," and again fumbling in his bag took out 
a tiny fret saw. striking the turnscrew through the lead with a swift 
downward stab, which made me wince, he made a small hole, which was, 
however, big enough to admit the point of the saw. i had expected a 
rush of gas from the week-old corpse. we doctors, who have had to 
study our dangers, have to become accustomed to such things, and i 
drew back towards the door. but the professor never stopped for a 
moment. he sawed down a couple of feet along one side of the lead 
coffin, and then across, and down the other side. taking the edge of 
the loose flange, he bent it back towards the foot of the coffin, and 
holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to look. 
i drew near and looked. the coffin was empty. it was certainly a 
surprise to me, and gave me a considerable shock, but van helsing was 
unmoved. he was now more sure than ever of his ground, and so 
emboldened to proceed in his task. "are you satisfied now, friend 
john?" he asked. 
i felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as 
i answered him, "i am satisfied that lucy's body is not in that 
coffin, but that only proves one thing." 
"and what is that, friend john?" 
"that it is not there." 
"that is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. but how do you, 
how can you, account for it not being there?" 
"perhaps a body-snatcher," i suggested. "some of the undertaker's 
people may have stolen it." i felt that i was speaking folly, and yet 
it was the only real cause which i could suggest. 
the professor sighed. "ah well!" he said, "we must have more proof. 
come with me." 
he put on the coffin lid again, gathered up all his things and placed 
them in the bag, blew out the light, and placed the candle also in the 
bag. we opened the door, and went out. behind us he closed the door 
and locked it. he handed me the key, saying, "will you keep it? you 
had better be assured." 
i laughed, it was not a very cheerful laugh, i am bound to say, as i 
motioned him to keep it. "a key is nothing," i said, "there are many 
duplicates, and anyhow it is not difficult to pick a lock of this 
kind." 
he said nothing, but put the key in his pocket. then he told me to 
watch at one side of the churchyard whilst he would watch at the 
other. 
i took up my place behind a yew tree, and i saw his dark figure move 
until the intervening headstones and trees hid it from my sight. 
it was a lonely vigil. just after i had taken my place i heard a 
distant clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. i was 
chilled and unnerved, and angry with the professor for taking me on 
such an errand and with myself for coming. i was too cold and too 
sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my 
trust, so altogether i had a dreary, miserable time. 
suddenly, as i turned round, i thought i saw something like a white 
streak, moving between two dark yew trees at the side of the 
churchyard farthest from the tomb. at the same time a dark mass moved 
from the professor's side of the ground, and hurriedly went towards 
it. then i too moved, but i had to go round headstones and railed-off 
tombs, and i stumbled over graves. the sky was overcast, and 
somewhere far off an early cock crew. a little ways off, beyond a 
line of scattered juniper trees, which marked the pathway to the 
church, a white dim figure flitted in the direction of the tomb. the 
tomb itself was hidden by trees, and i could not see where the figure 
had disappeared. i heard the rustle of actual movement where i had 
first seen the white figure, and coming over, found the professor 
holding in his arms a tiny child. when he saw me he held it out to 
me, and said, "are you satisfied now?" 
"no," i said, in a way that i felt was aggressive. 
"do you not see the child?" 
"yes, it is a child, but who brought it here? and is it wounded?" 
"we shall see," said the professor, and with one impulse we took our 
way out of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child. 
when we had got some little distance away, we went into a clump of 
trees, and struck a match, and looked at the child's throat. it was 
without a scratch or scar of any kind. 
"was i right?" i asked triumphantly. 
"we were just in time," said the professor thankfully. 
we had now to decide what we were to do with the child, and so 
consulted about it. if we were to take it to a police station we 
should have to give some account of our movements during the night. 
at least, we should have had to make some statement as to how we had 
come to find the child. so finally we decided that we would take it 
to the heath, and when we heard a policeman coming, would leave it 
where he could not fail to find it. we would then seek our way home 
as quickly as we could. all fell out well. at the edge of hampstead 
heath we heard a policeman's heavy tramp, and laying the child on the 
pathway, we waited and watched until he saw it as he flashed his 
lantern to and fro. we heard his exclamation of astonishment, and 
then we went away silently. by good chance we got a cab near the 
'spainiards,' and drove to town. 
i cannot sleep, so i make this entry. but i must try to get a few 
hours' sleep, as van helsing is to call for me at noon. he insists 
that i go with him on another expedition. 
27 september.-it was two o'clock before we found a suitable 
opportunity for our attempt. the funeral held at noon was all 
completed, and the last stragglers of the mourners had taken 
themselves lazily away, when, looking carefully from behind a clump of 
alder trees, we saw the sexton lock the gate after him. we knew that 
we were safe till morning did we desire it, but the professor told me 
that we should not want more than an hour at most. again i felt that 
horrid sense of the reality of things, in which any effort of 
imagination seemed out of place, and i realized distinctly the perils 
of the law which we were incurring in our unhallowed work. besides, i 
felt it was all so useless. outrageous as it was to open a leaden 
coffin, to see if a woman dead nearly a week were really dead, it now 
seemed the height of folly to open the tomb again, when we knew, from 
the evidence of our own eyesight, that the coffin was empty. i 
shrugged my shoulders, however, and rested silent, for van helsing had 
a way of going on his own road, no matter who remonstrated. he took 
the key, opened the vault, and again courteously motioned me to 
precede. the place was not so gruesome as last night, but oh, how 
unutterably mean looking when the sunshine streamed in. van helsing 
walked over to lucy's coffin, and i followed. he bent over and again 
forced back the leaden flange, and a shock of surprise and dismay shot 
through me. 
there lay lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her the night before her 
funeral. she was, if possible, more radiantly beautiful than ever, 
and i could not believe that she was dead. the lips were red, nay 
redder than before, and on the cheeks was a delicate bloom. 
"is this a juggle?" i said to him. 
"are you convinced now?" said the professor, in response, and as he 
spoke he put over his hand, and in a way that made me shudder, pulled 
back the dead lips and showed the white teeth. "see," he went on, 
"they are even sharper than before. with this and this," and he 
touched one of the canine teeth and that below it, "the little 
children can be bitten. are you of belief now, friend john?" 
once more argumentative hostility woke within me. i could not accept 
such an overwhelming idea as he suggested. so, with an attempt to 
argue of which i was even at the moment ashamed, i said, "she may have 
been placed here since last night." 
"indeed? that is so, and by whom?" 
"i do not know. someone has done it." 
"and yet she has been dead one week. most peoples in that time would 
not look so." 
i had no answer for this, so was silent. van helsing did not seem to 
notice my silence. at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor 
triumph. he was looking intently at the face of the dead woman, 
raising the eyelids and looking at the eyes, and once more opening the 
lips and examining the teeth. then he turned to me and said, 
"here, there is one thing which is different from all recorded. here 
is some dual life that is not as the common. she was bitten by the 
vampire when she was in a trance, sleep-walking, oh, you start. you 
do not know that, friend john, but you shall know it later, and in 
trance could he best come to take more blood. in trance she dies, and 
in trance she is undead, too. so it is that she differ from all 
other. usually when the undead sleep at home," as he spoke he made a 
comprehensive sweep of his arm to designate what to a vampire was 
'home', "their face show what they are, but this so sweet that was 
when she not undead she go back to the nothings of the common dead. 
there is no malign there, see, and so it make hard that i must kill 
her in her sleep." 
this turned my blood cold, and it began to dawn upon me that i was 
accepting van helsing's theories. but if she were really dead, what 
was there of terror in the idea of killing her? 
he looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in my face, for he 
said almost joyously, "ah, you believe now?" 
i answered, "do not press me too hard all at once. i am willing to 
accept. how will you do this bloody work?" 
"i shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and i shall 
drive a stake through her body." 
it made me shudder to think of so mutilating the body of the woman 
whom i had loved. and yet the feeling was not so strong as i had 
expected. i was, in fact, beginning to shudder at the presence of 
this being, this undead, as van helsing called it, and to loathe it. 
is it possible that love is all subjective, or all objective? 
i waited a considerable time for van helsing to begin, but he stood as 
if wrapped in thought. presently he closed the catch of his bag with 
a snap, and said, 
"i have been thinking, and have made up my mind as to what is best. 
if i did simply follow my inclining i would do now, at this moment, 
what is to be done. but there are other things to follow, and things 
that are thousand times more difficult in that them we do not know. 
this is simple. she have yet no life taken, though that is of time, 
and to act now would be to take danger from her forever. but then we 
may have to want arthur, and how shall we tell him of this? if you, 
who saw the wounds on lucy's throat, and saw the wounds so similar on 
the child's at the hospital, if you, who saw the coffin empty last 
night and full today with a woman who have not change only to be more 
rose and more beautiful in a whole week, after she die, if you know of 
this and know of the white figure last night that brought the child to 
the churchyard, and yet of your own senses you did not believe, how 
then, can i expect arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? 
"he doubted me when i took him from her kiss when she was dying. i 
know he has forgiven me because in some mistaken idea i have done 
things that prevent him say goodbye as he ought, and he may think that 
in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive, and that in 
most mistake of all we have killed her. he will then argue back that 
it is we, mistaken ones, that have killed her by our ideas, and so he 
will be much unhappy always. yet he never can be sure, and that is 
the worst of all. and he will sometimes think that she he loved was 
buried alive, and that will paint his dreams with horrors of what she 
must have suffered, and again, he will think that we may be right, and 
that his so beloved was, after all, an undead. no! i told him once, 
and since then i learn much. now, since i know it is all true, a 
hundred thousand times more do i know that he must pass through the 
bitter waters to reach the sweet. he, poor fellow, must have one hour 
that will make the very face of heaven grow black to him, then we can 
act for good all round and send him peace. my mind is made up. let 
us go. you return home for tonight to your asylum, and see that all 
be well. as for me, i shall spend the night here in this churchyard 
in my own way. tomorrow night you will come to me to the berkeley 
hotel at ten of the clock. i shall send for arthur to come too, and 
also that so fine young man of america that gave his blood. later we 
shall all have work to do. i come with you so far as piccadilly and 
there dine, for i must be back here before the sun set." 
so we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the 
churchyard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to 
piccadilly. 
note left by van helsing in his portmanteau, berkeley hotel directed to 
john seward, m. d. (not delivered) 
27 september 
"friend john, 
"i write this in case anything should happen. i go alone to 
watch in that churchyard. it pleases me that the undead, 
miss lucy, shall not leave tonight, that so on the morrow 
night she may be more eager. therefore i shall fix some 
things she like not, garlic and a crucifix, and so seal up 
the door of the tomb. she is young as undead, and will 
heed. moreover, these are only to prevent her coming out. 
they may not prevail on her wanting to get in, for then the 
undead is desperate, and must find the line of least resistance, 
whatsoever it may be. i shall be at hand all the night from 
sunset till after sunrise, and if there be aught that may be 
learned i shall learn it. for miss lucy or from her, i have no 
fear, but that other to whom is there that she is undead, he have 
not the power to seek her tomb and find shelter. he is cunning, 
as i know from mr. jonathan and from the way that all along he 
have fooled us when he played with us for miss lucy's life, and 
we lost, and in many ways the undead are strong. he have always 
the strength in his hand of twenty men, even we four who gave our 
strength to miss lucy it also is all to him. besides, he can 
summon his wolf and i know not what. so if it be that he came 
thither on this night he shall find me. but none other shall, 
until it be too late. but it may be that he will not attempt the 
place. there is no reason why he should. his hunting ground is 
more full of game than the churchyard where the undead woman 
sleeps, and the one old man watch. 
"therefore i write this in case . . . take the papers that 
are with this, the diaries of harker and the rest, and read 
them, and then find this great undead, and cut off his head 
and burn his heart or drive a stake through it, so that the 
world may rest from him. 
"if it be so, farewell. 
"van helsing." 
dr. seward's diary 
28 september.-it is wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for 
one. yesterday i was almost willing to accept van helsing's monstrous 
ideas, but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on 
common sense. i have no doubt that he believes it all. i wonder if 
his mind can have become in any way unhinged. surely there must be 
some rational explanation of all these mysterious things. is it 
possible that the professor can have done it himself? he is so 
abnormally clever that if he went off his head he would carry out his 
intent with regard to some fixed idea in a wonderful way. i am loathe 
to think it, and indeed it would be almost as great a marvel as the 
other to find that van helsing was mad, but anyhow i shall watch him 
carefully. i may get some light on the mystery. 
29 september.-last night, at a little before ten o'clock, arthur and 
quincey came into van helsing's room. he told us all what he wanted 
us to do, but especially addressing himself to arthur, as if all our 
wills were centred in his. he began by saying that he hoped we would 
all come with him too, "for," he said, "there is a grave duty to be 
done there. you were doubtless surprised at my letter?" this query 
was directly addressed to lord godalming. 
"i was. it rather upset me for a bit. there has been so much trouble 
around my house of late that i could do without any more. i have been 
curious, too, as to what you mean. 
"quincey and i talked it over, but the more we talked, the more 
puzzled we got, till now i can say for myself that i'm about up a tree 
as to any meaning about anything." 
"me too," said quincey morris laconically. 
"oh," said the professor, "then you are nearer the beginning, both of 
you, than friend john here, who has to go a long way back before he 
can even get so far as to begin." 
it was evident that he recognized my return to my old doubting frame 
of mind without my saying a word. then, turning to the other two, he 
said with intense gravity, 
"i want your permission to do what i think good this night. it is, i 
know, much to ask, and when you know what it is i propose to do you 
will know, and only then how much. therefore may i ask that you 
promise me in the dark, so that afterwards, though you may be angry 
with me for a time, i must not disguise from myself the possibility 
that such may be, you shall not blame yourselves for anything." 
"that's frank anyhow," broke in quincey. "i'll answer for the 
professor. i don't quite see his drift, but i swear he's honest, and 
that's good enough for me." 
"i thank you, sir," said van helsing proudly. "i have done myself the 
honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is 
dear to me." he held out a hand, which quincey took. 
then arthur spoke out, "dr. van helsing, i don't quite like to 'buy a 
pig in a poke', as they say in scotland, and if it be anything in 
which my honour as a gentleman or my faith as a christian is 
concerned, i cannot make such a promise. if you can assure me that 
what you intend does not violate either of these two, then i give my 
consent at once, though for the life of me, i cannot understand what 
you are driving at." 
"i accept your limitation," said van helsing, "and all i ask of you is 
that if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will 
first consider it well and be satisfied that it does not violate your 
reservations." 
"agreed!" said arthur. "that is only fair. and now that the 
pourparlers are over, may i ask what it is we are to do?" 
"i want you to come with me, and to come in secret, to the churchyard 
at kingstead." 
arthur's face fell as he said in an amazed sort of way, 
"where poor lucy is buried?" 
the professor bowed. 
arthur went on, "and when there?" 
"to enter the tomb!" 
arthur stood up. "professor, are you in earnest, or is it some 
monstrous joke? pardon me, i see that you are in earnest." he sat 
down again, but i could see that he sat firmly and proudly, as one who 
is on his dignity. there was silence until he asked again, "and when 
in the tomb?" 
"to open the coffin." 
"this is too much!" he said, angrily rising again. "i am willing to 
be patient in all things that are reasonable, but in this, this 
desecration of the grave, of one who . . ." he fairly choked with 
indignation. 
the professor looked pityingly at him. "if i could spare you one pang, 
my poor friend," he said, "god knows i would. but this night our feet 
must tread in thorny paths, or later, and for ever, the feet you love 
must walk in paths of flame!" 
arthur looked up with set white face and said, "take care, sir, take 
care!" 
"would it not be well to hear what i have to say?" said van helsing. 
"and then you will at least know the limit of my purpose. shall i go 
on?" 
"that's fair enough," broke in morris. 
after a pause van helsing went on, evidently with an effort, "miss 
lucy is dead, is it not so? yes! then there can be no wrong to her. 
but if she be not dead . . ." 
arthur jumped to his feet, "good god!" he cried. "what do you mean? 
has there been any mistake, has she been buried alive?" he groaned in 
anguish that not even hope could soften. 
"i did not say she was alive, my child. i did not think it. i go no 
further than to say that she might be undead." 
"undead! not alive! what do you mean? is this all a nightmare, or 
what is it?" 
"there are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age 
they may solve only in part. believe me, we are now on the verge of 
one. but i have not done. may i cut off the head of dead miss lucy?" 
"heavens and earth, no!" cried arthur in a storm of passion. "not for 
the wide world will i consent to any mutilation of her dead body. dr. 
van helsing, you try me too far. what have i done to you that you 
should torture me so? what did that poor, sweet girl do that you 
should want to cast such dishonour on her grave? are you mad, that you 
speak of such things, or am i mad to listen to them? don't dare think 
more of such a desecration. i shall not give my consent to anything 
you do. i have a duty to do in protecting her grave from outrage, and 
by god, i shall do it!" 
van helsing rose up from where he had all the time been seated, and 
said, gravely and sternly, "my lord godalming, i too, have a duty to 
do, a duty to others, a duty to you, a duty to the dead, and by god, i 
shall do it! all i ask you now is that you come with me, that you 
look and listen, and if when later i make the same request you do not 
be more eager for its fulfillment even than i am, then, i shall do my 
duty, whatever it may seem to me. and then, to follow your lordship's 
wishes i shall hold myself at your disposal to render an account to 
you, when and where you will." his voice broke a little, and he went 
on with a voice full of pity. 
"but i beseech you, do not go forth in anger with me. in a long life 
of acts which were often not pleasant to do, and which sometimes did 
wring my heart, i have never had so heavy a task as now. believe me 
that if the time comes for you to change your mind towards me, one 
look from you will wipe away all this so sad hour, for i would do what 
a man can to save you from sorrow. just think. for why should i give 
myself so much labor and so much of sorrow? i have come here from my 
own land to do what i can of good, at the first to please my friend 
john, and then to help a sweet young lady, whom too, i come to love. 
for her, i am ashamed to say so much, but i say it in kindness, i gave 
what you gave, the blood of my veins. i gave it, i who was not, like 
you, her lover, but only her physician and her friend. i gave her my 
nights and days, before death, after death, and if my death can do her 
good even now, when she is the dead undead, she shall have it freely." 
he said this with a very grave, sweet pride, and arthur was much 
affected by it. 
he took the old man's hand and said in a broken voice, "oh, it is hard 
to think of it, and i cannot understand, but at least i shall go with 
you and wait." 
chapter 16 
dr seward's diary-cont. 
it was just a quarter before twelve o'clock when we got into the 
churchyard over the low wall. the night was dark with occasional 
gleams of moonlight between the dents of the heavy clouds that scudded 
across the sky. we all kept somehow close together, with van helsing 
slightly in front as he led the way. when we had come close to the 
tomb i looked well at arthur, for i feared the proximity to a place 
laden with so sorrowful a memory would upset him, but he bore himself 
well. i took it that the very mystery of the proceeding was in some 
way a counteractant to his grief. the professor unlocked the door, 
and seeing a natural hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved 
the difficulty by entering first himself. the rest of us followed, 
and he closed the door. he then lit a dark lantern and pointed to a 
coffin. arthur stepped forward hesitatingly. van helsing said to me, 
"you were with me here yesterday. was the body of miss lucy in that 
coffin?" 
"it was." 
the professor turned to the rest saying, "you hear, and yet there is 
no one who does not believe with me." 
he took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin. 
arthur looked on, very pale but silent. when the lid was removed he 
stepped forward. he evidently did not know that there was a leaden 
coffin, or at any rate, had not thought of it. when he saw the rent 
in the lead, the blood rushed to his face for an instant, but as 
quickly fell away again, so that he remained of a ghastly whiteness. 
he was still silent. van helsing forced back the leaden flange, and 
we all looked in and recoiled. 
the coffin was empty! 
for several minutes no one spoke a word. the silence was broken by 
quincey morris, "professor, i answered for you. your word is all i 
want. i wouldn't ask such a thing ordinarily, i wouldn't so dishonour 
you as to imply a doubt, but this is a mystery that goes beyond any 
honour or dishonour. is this your doing?" 
"i swear to you by all that i hold sacred that i have not removed or 
touched her. what happened was this. two nights ago my friend seward 
and i came here, with good purpose, believe me. i opened that coffin, 
which was then sealed up, and we found it as now, empty. we then 
waited, and saw something white come through the trees. the next day 
we came here in daytime and she lay there. did she not, friend john? 
"yes." 
"that night we were just in time. one more so small child was 
missing, and we find it, thank god, unharmed amongst the graves. 
yesterday i came here before sundown, for at sundown the undead can 
move. i waited here all night till the sun rose, but i saw nothing. 
it was most probable that it was because i had laid over the clamps of 
those doors garlic, which the undead cannot bear, and other things 
which they shun. last night there was no exodus, so tonight before 
the sundown i took away my garlic and other things. and so it is we 
find this coffin empty. but bear with me. so far there is much that 
is strange. wait you with me outside, unseen and unheard, and things 
much stranger are yet to be. so," here he shut the dark slide of his 
lantern, "now to the outside." he opened the door, and we filed out, 
he coming last and locking the door behind him. 
oh! but it seemed fresh and pure in the night air after the terror of 
that vault. how sweet it was to see the clouds race by, and the 
passing gleams of the moonlight between the scudding clouds crossing 
and passing, like the gladness and sorrow of a man's life. how sweet 
it was to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay. 
how humanizing to see the red lighting of the sky beyond the hill, and 
to hear far away the muffled roar that marks the life of a great 
city. each in his own way was solemn and overcome. arthur was 
silent, and was, i could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the 
inner meaning of the mystery. i was myself tolerably patient, and 
half inclined again to throw aside doubt and to accept van helsing's 
conclusions. quincey morris was phlegmatic in the way of a man who 
accepts all things, and accepts them in the spirit of cool bravery, 
with hazard of all he has at stake. not being able to smoke, he cut 
himself a good-sized plug of tobacco and began to chew. as to van 
helsing, he was employed in a definite way. first he took from his 
bag a mass of what looked like thin, wafer-like biscuit, which was 
carefully rolled up in a white napkin. next he took out a double 
handful of some whitish stuff, like dough or putty. he crumbled the 
wafer up fine and worked it into the mass between his hands. this he 
then took, and rolling it into thin strips, began to lay them into the 
crevices between the door and its setting in the tomb. i was somewhat 
puzzled at this, and being close, asked him what it was that he was 
doing. arthur and quincey drew near also, as they too were curious. 
he answered, "i am closing the tomb so that the undead may not enter." 
"and is that stuff you have there going to do it?" 
"it is." 
"what is that which you are using?" this time the question was by 
arthur. van helsing reverently lifted his hat as he answered. 
"the host. i brought it from amsterdam. i have an indulgence." 
it was an answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and we felt 
individually that in the presence of such earnest purpose as the 
professor's, a purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of 
things, it was impossible to distrust. in respectful silence we took 
the places assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the 
sight of any one approaching. i pitied the others, especially arthur. 
i had myself been apprenticed by my former visits to this watching 
horror, and yet i, who had up to an hour ago repudiated the proofs, 
felt my heart sink within me. never did tombs look so ghastly white. 
never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of 
funeral gloom. never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously. 
never did bough creak so mysteriously, and never did the far-away 
howling of dogs send such a woeful presage through the night. 
there was a long spell of silence, big, aching, void, and then from 
the professor a keen "s-s-s-s!" he pointed, and far down the avenue of 
yews we saw a white figure advance, a dim white figure, which held 
something dark at its breast. the figure stopped, and at the moment a 
ray of moonlight fell upon the masses of driving clouds, and showed in 
startling prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of 
the grave. we could not see the face, for it was bent down over what 
we saw to be a fair-haired child. there was a pause and a sharp 
little cry, such as a child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before 
the fire and dreams. we were starting forward, but the professor's 
warning hand, seen by us as he stood behind a yew tree, kept us back. 
and then as we looked the white figure moved forwards again. it was 
now near enough for us to see clearly, and the moonlight still held. 
my own heart grew cold as ice, and i could hear the gasp of arthur, as 
we recognized the features of lucy westenra. lucy westenra, but yet 
how changed. the sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless 
cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness. 
van helsing stepped out, and obedient to his gesture, we all advanced 
too. the four of us ranged in a line before the door of the tomb. van 
helsing raised his lantern and drew the slide. by the concentrated 
light that fell on lucy's face we could see that the lips were crimson 
with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her chin and 
stained the purity of her lawn death-robe. 
we shuddered with horror. i could see by the tremulous light that 
even van helsing's iron nerve had failed. arthur was next to me, and 
if i had not seized his arm and held him up, he would have fallen. 
when lucy, i call the thing that was before us lucy because it bore 
her shape, saw us she drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat 
gives when taken unawares, then her eyes ranged over us. lucy's eyes 
in form and colour, but lucy's eyes unclean and full of hell fire, 
instead of the pure, gentle orbs we knew. at that moment the remnant 
of my love passed into hate and loathing. had she then to be killed, 
i could have done it with savage delight. as she looked, her eyes 
blazed with unholy light, and the face became wreathed with a 
voluptuous smile. oh, god, how it made me shudder to see it! with a 
careless motion, she flung to the ground, callous as a devil, the 
child that up to now she had clutched strenuously to her breast, 
growling over it as a dog growls over a bone. the child gave a sharp 
cry, and lay there moaning. there was a cold-bloodedness in the act 
which wrung a groan from arthur. when she advanced to him with 
outstretched arms and a wanton smile he fell back and hid his face in 
his hands. 
she still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace, 
said, "come to me, arthur. leave these others and come to me. my 
arms are hungry for you. come, and we can rest together. come, my 
husband, come!" 
there was something diabolically sweet in her tones, something of the 
tinkling of glass when struck, which rang through the brains even of 
us who heard the words addressed to another. 
as for arthur, he seemed under a spell, moving his hands from his 
face, he opened wide his arms. she was leaping for them, when van 
helsing sprang forward and held between them his little golden 
crucifix. she recoiled from it, and, with a suddenly distorted face, 
full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter the tomb. 
when within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if 
arrested by some irresistible force. then she turned, and her face 
was shown in the clear burst of moonlight and by the lamp, which had 
now no quiver from van helsing's nerves. never did i see such baffled 
malice on a face, and never, i trust, shall such ever be seen again by 
mortal eyes. the beautiful colour became livid, the eyes seemed to 
throw out sparks of hell fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the 
folds of flesh were the coils of medusa's snakes, and the lovely, 
blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the passion masks of 
the greeks and japanese. if ever a face meant death, if looks could 
kill, we saw it at that moment. 
and so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained 
between the lifted crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of 
entry. 
van helsing broke the silence by asking arthur, "answer me, oh my 
friend! am i to proceed in my work?" 
"do as you will, friend. do as you will. there can be no horror like 
this ever any more." and he groaned in spirit. 
quincey and i simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms. we 
could hear the click of the closing lantern as van helsing held it 
down. coming close to the tomb, he began to remove from the chinks 
some of the sacred emblem which he had placed there. we all looked on 
with horrified amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, 
with a corporeal body as real at that moment as our own, pass through 
the interstice where scarce a knife blade could have gone. we all 
felt a glad sense of relief when we saw the professor calmly restoring 
the strings of putty to the edges of the door. 
when this was done, he lifted the child and said, "come now, my 
friends. we can do no more till tomorrow. there is a funeral at 
noon, so here we shall all come before long after that. the friends 
of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the sexton locks the 
gate we shall remain. then there is more to do, but not like this of 
tonight. as for this little one, he is not much harmed, and by 
tomorrow night he shall be well. we shall leave him where the police 
will find him, as on the other night, and then to home." 
coming close to arthur, he said, "my friend arthur, you have had a sore 
trial, but after, when you look back, you will see how it was 
necessary. you are now in the bitter waters, my child. by this time 
tomorrow you will, please god, have passed them, and have drunk of the 
sweet waters. so do not mourn over-much. till then i shall not ask 
you to forgive me." 
arthur and quincey came home with me, and we tried to cheer each other 
on the way. we had left behind the child in safety, and were tired. 
so we all slept with more or less reality of sleep. 
29 september, night.-a little before twelve o'clock we three, arthur, 
quincey morris, and myself, called for the professor. it was odd to 
notice that by common consent we had all put on black clothes. of 
course, arthur wore black, for he was in deep mourning, but the rest 
of us wore it by instinct. we got to the graveyard by half-past one, 
and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when 
the gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton, under the 
belief that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place 
all to ourselves. van helsing, instead of his little black bag, had 
with him a long leather one, something like a cricketing bag. it was 
manifestly of fair weight. 
when we were alone and had heard the last of the footsteps die out up 
the road, we silently, and as if by ordered intention, followed the 
professor to the tomb. he unlocked the door, and we entered, closing 
it behind us. then he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, 
and also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck by melting 
their own ends, on other coffins, so that they might give light 
sufficient to work by. when he again lifted the lid off lucy's coffin 
we all looked, arthur trembling like an aspen, and saw that the corpse 
lay there in all its death beauty. but there was no love in my own 
heart, nothing but loathing for the foul thing which had taken lucy's 
shape without her soul. i could see even arthur's face grow hard as 
he looked. presently he said to van helsing, "is this really lucy's 
body, or only a demon in her shape?" 
"it is her body, and yet not it. but wait a while, and you shall see 
her as she was, and is." 
she seemed like a nightmare of lucy as she lay there, the pointed 
teeth, the blood stained, voluptuous mouth, which made one shudder to 
see, the whole carnal and unspirited appearance, seeming like a 
devilish mockery of lucy's sweet purity. van helsing, with his usual 
methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and 
placing them ready for use. first he took out a soldering iron and 
some plumbing solder, and then small oil lamp, which gave out, when 
lit in a corner of the tomb, gas which burned at a fierce heat with a 
blue flame, then his operating knives, which he placed to hand, and 
last a round wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches thick 
and about three feet long. one end of it was hardened by charring in 
the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. with this stake came a 
heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the coal cellar for 
breaking the lumps. to me, a doctor's preparations for work of any 
kind are stimulating and bracing, but the effect of these things on 
both arthur and quincey was to cause them a sort of consternation. 
they both, however, kept their courage, and remained silent and quiet. 
when all was ready, van helsing said, "before we do anything, let me 
tell you this. it is out of the lore and experience of the ancients 
and of all those who have studied the powers of the undead. when they 
become such, there comes with the change the curse of immortality. 
they cannot die, but must go on age after age adding new victims and 
multiplying the evils of the world. for all that die from the preying 
of the undead become themselves undead, and prey on their kind. and 
so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone 
thrown in the water. friend arthur, if you had met that kiss which 
you know of before poor lucy die, or again, last night when you open 
your arms to her, you would in time, when you had died, have become 
nosferatu, as they call it in eastern europe, and would for all time 
make more of those un-deads that so have filled us with horror. the 
career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. those children 
whose blood she sucked are not as yet so much the worse, but if she 
lives on, undead, more and more they lose their blood and by her power 
over them they come to her, and so she draw their blood with that so 
wicked mouth. but if she die in truth, then all cease. the tiny 
wounds of the throats disappear, and they go back to their play 
unknowing ever of what has been. but of the most blessed of all, when 
this now undead be made to rest as true dead, then the soul of the 
poor lady whom we love shall again be free. instead of working 
wickedness by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it 
by day, she shall take her place with the other angels. so that, my 
friend, it will be a blessed hand for her that shall strike the blow 
that sets her free. to this i am willing, but is there none amongst 
us who has a better right? will it be no joy to think of hereafter in 
the silence of the night when sleep is not, 'it was my hand that sent 
her to the stars. it was the hand of him that loved her best, the 
hand that of all she would herself have chosen, had it been to her to 
choose?' tell me if there be such a one amongst us?" 
we all looked at arthur. he saw too, what we all did, the infinite 
kindness which suggested that his should be the hand which would 
restore lucy to us as a holy, and not an unholy, memory. he stepped 
forward and said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was 
as pale as snow, "my true friend, from the bottom of my broken heart i 
thank you. tell me what i am to do, and i shall not falter!" 
van helsing laid a hand on his shoulder, and said, "brave lad! a 
moment's courage, and it is done. this stake must be driven through 
her. it well be a fearful ordeal, be not deceived in that, but it 
will be only a short time, and you will then rejoice more than your 
pain was great. from this grim tomb you will emerge as though you 
tread on air. but you must not falter when once you have begun. only 
think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we pray for 
you all the time." 
"go on," said arthur hoarsely. "tell me what i am to do." 
"take this stake in your left hand, ready to place to the point over 
the heart, and the hammer in your right. then when we begin our 
prayer for the dead, i shall read him, i have here the book, and the 
others shall follow, strike in god's name, that so all may be well 
with the dead that we love and that the undead pass away." 
arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his mind was set 
on action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. van helsing 
opened his missal and began to read, and quincey and i followed as 
well as we could. 
arthur placed the point over the heart, and as i looked i could see its 
dint in the white flesh. then he struck with all his might. 
the thing in the coffin writhed, and a hideous, blood-curdling screech 
came from the opened red lips. the body shook and quivered and 
twisted in wild contortions. the sharp white teeth champed together till 
the lips were cut, and the mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. but 
arthur never faltered. he looked like a figure of thor as his 
untrembling arm rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper the 
mercy-bearing stake, whilst the blood from the pierced heart welled 
and spurted up around it. his face was set, and high duty seemed to 
shine through it. the sight of it gave us courage so that our voices 
seemed to ring through the little vault. 
and then the writhing and quivering of the body became less, and the 
teeth seemed to champ, and the face to quiver. finally it lay still. 
the terrible task was over. 
the hammer fell from arthur's hand. he reeled and would have fallen 
had we not caught him. the great drops of sweat sprang from his 
forehead, and his breath came in broken gasps. it had indeed been an 
awful strain on him, and had he not been forced to his task by more 
than human considerations he could never have gone through with it. 
for a few minutes we were so taken up with him that we did not look 
towards the coffin. when we did, however, a murmur of startled 
surprise ran from one to the other of us. we gazed so eagerly that 
arthur rose, for he had been seated on the ground, and came and looked 
too, and then a glad strange light broke over his face and dispelled 
altogether the gloom of horror that lay upon it. 
there, in the coffin lay no longer the foul thing that we had so 
dreaded and grown to hate that the work of her destruction was yielded 
as a privilege to the one best entitled to it, but lucy as we had seen 
her in life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. true 
that there were there, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care 
and pain and waste. but these were all dear to us, for they marked 
her truth to what we knew. one and all we felt that the holy calm 
that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and form was only an 
earthly token and symbol of the calm that was to reign for ever. 
van helsing came and laid his hand on arthur's shoulder, and said to 
him, "and now, arthur my friend, dear lad, am i not forgiven?" 
the reaction of the terrible strain came as he took the old man's hand 
in his, and raising it to his lips, pressed it, and said, "forgiven! 
god bless you that you have given my dear one her soul again, and me 
peace." he put his hands on the professor's shoulder, and laying his 
head on his breast, cried for a while silently, whilst we stood 
unmoving. 
when he raised his head van helsing said to him, "and now, my child, 
you may kiss her. kiss her dead lips if you will, as she would have 
you to, if for her to choose. for she is not a grinning devil now, 
not any more a foul thing for all eternity. no longer she is the 
devil's undead. she is god's true dead, whose soul is with him!" 
arthur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and quincey out of the 
tomb. the professor and i sawed the top off the stake, leaving the 
point of it in the body. then we cut off the head and filled the 
mouth with garlic. we soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the 
coffin lid, and gathering up our belongings, came away. when the 
professor locked the door he gave the key to arthur. 
outside the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it 
seemed as if all nature were tuned to a different pitch. there was 
gladness and mirth and peace everywhere, for we were at rest ourselves 
on one account, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy. 
before we moved away van helsing said, "now, my friends, one step of 
our work is done, one the most harrowing to ourselves. but there 
remains a greater task: to find out the author of all this our sorrow 
and to stamp him out. i have clues which we can follow, but it is a 
long task, and a difficult one, and there is danger in it, and pain. 
shall you not all help me? we have learned to believe, all of us, is 
it not so? and since so, do we not see our duty? yes! and do we not 
promise to go on to the bitter end?" 
each in turn, we took his hand, and the promise was made. then said 
the professor as we moved off, "two nights hence you shall meet with 
me and dine together at seven of the clock with friend john. i shall 
entreat two others, two that you know not as yet, and i shall be ready 
to all our work show and our plans unfold. friend john, you come with 
me home, for i have much to consult you about, and you can help me. 
tonight i leave for amsterdam, but shall return tomorrow night. and 
then begins our great quest. but first i shall have much to say, so 
that you may know what to do and to dread. then our promise shall be 
made to each other anew. for there is a terrible task before us, and 
once our feet are on the ploughshare we must not draw back." 
chapter 17 
dr. seward's diary-cont. 
when we arrived at the berkely hotel, van helsing found a telegram 
waiting for him. 
"am coming up by train. jonathan at whitby. important news. mina 
harker." 
the professor was delighted. "ah, that wonderful madam mina," he 
said, "pearl among women! she arrive, but i cannot stay. she must go 
to your house, friend john. you must meet her at the station. 
telegraph her en route so that she may be prepared." 
when the wire was dispatched he had a cup of tea. over it he told me 
of a diary kept by jonathan harker when abroad, and gave me a 
typewritten copy of it, as also of mrs. harker's diary at whitby. 
"take these," he said, "and study them well. when i have returned you 
will be master of all the facts, and we can then better enter on our 
inquisition. keep them safe, for there is in them much of treasure. 
you will need all your faith, even you who have had such an experience 
as that of today. what is here told," he laid his hand heavily and 
gravely on the packet of papers as he spoke, "may be the beginning of 
the end to you and me and many another, or it may sound the knell of 
the undead who walk the earth. read all, i pray you, with the open 
mind, and if you can add in any way to the story here told do so, for 
it is all important. you have kept a diary of all these so strange 
things, is it not so? yes! then we shall go through all these 
together when we meet." he then made ready for his departure and 
shortly drove off to liverpool street. i took my way to paddington, 
where i arrived about fifteen minutes before the train came in. 
the crowd melted away, after the bustling fashion common to arrival 
platforms, and i was beginning to feel uneasy, lest i might miss my 
guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty looking girl stepped up to me, and 
after a quick glance said, "dr. seward, is it not?" 
"and you are mrs. harker!" i answered at once, whereupon she held out 
her hand. 
"i knew you from the description of poor dear lucy, but . . ." she 
stopped suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face. 
the blush that rose to my own cheeks somehow set us both at ease, for 
it was a tacit answer to her own. i got her luggage, which included a 
typewriter, and we took the underground to fenchurch street, after i 
had sent a wire to my housekeeper to have a sitting room and a bedroom 
prepared at once for mrs. harker. 
in due time we arrived. she knew, of course, that the place was a 
lunatic asylum, but i could see that she was unable to repress a 
shudder when we entered. 
she told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, 
as she had much to say. so here i am finishing my entry in my 
phonograph diary whilst i await her. as yet i have not had the chance 
of looking at the papers which van helsing left with me, though they 
lie open before me. i must get her interested in something, so that i 
may have an opportunity of reading them. she does not know how 
precious time is, or what a task we have in hand. i must be careful 
not to frighten her. here she is! 
mina harker's journal 
29 september.-after i had tidied myself, i went down to dr. seward's 
study. at the door i paused a moment, for i thought i heard him 
talking with some one. as, however, he had pressed me to be quick, i 
knocked at the door, and on his calling out, "come in," i entered. 
to my intense surprise, there was no one with him. he was quite 
alone, and on the table opposite him was what i knew at once from the 
description to be a phonograph. i had never seen one, and was much 
interested. 
"i hope i did not keep you waiting," i said, "but i stayed at the door 
as i heard you talking, and thought there was someone with you." 
"oh," he replied with a smile, "i was only entering my diary." 
"your diary?" i asked him in surprise. 
"yes," he answered. "i keep it in this." as he spoke he laid his 
hand on the phonograph. i felt quite excited over it, and blurted 
out, "why, this beats even shorthand! may i hear it say something?" 
"certainly," he replied with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train 
for speaking. then he paused, and a troubled look overspread his 
face. 
"the fact is," he began awkwardly, "i only keep my diary in it, and as 
it is entirely, almost entirely, about my cases it may be awkward, 
that is, i mean . . ." he stopped, and i tried to help him out of his 
embarrassment. 
"you helped to attend dear lucy at the end. let me hear how she died, 
for all that i know of her, i shall be very grateful. she was very, 
very dear to me." 
to my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face, 
"tell you of her death? not for the wide world!" 
"why not?" i asked, for some grave, terrible feeling was coming over me. 
again he paused, and i could see that he was trying to invent an 
excuse. at length, he stammered out, "you see, i do not know how to 
pick out any particular part of the diary." 
even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and he said with 
unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the naivete of 
a child, "that's quite true, upon my honour. honest indian!" 
i could not but smile, at which he grimaced. "i gave myself away that 
time!" he said. "but do you know that, although i have kept the diary 
for months past, it never once struck me how i was going to find any 
particular part of it in case i wanted to look it up?" 
by this time my mind was made up that the diary of a doctor who 
attended lucy might have something to add to the sum of our knowledge 
of that terrible being, and i said boldly, "then, dr. seward, you had 
better let me copy it out for you on my typewriter." 
he grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said, "no! no! no! for 
all the world. i wouldn't let you know that terrible story!" 
then it was terrible. my intuition was right! for a moment, i 
thought, and as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for 
something or some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of 
typewriting on the table. his eyes caught the look in mine, and 
without his thinking, followed their direction. as they saw the 
parcel he realized my meaning. 
"you do not know me," i said. "when you have read those papers, my 
own diary and my husband's also, which i have typed, you will know me 
better. i have not faltered in giving every thought of my own heart 
in this cause. but, of course, you do not know me, yet, and i must 
not expect you to trust me so far." 
he is certainly a man of noble nature. poor dear lucy was right about 
him. he stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were arranged in 
order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and 
said, 
"you are quite right. i did not trust you because i did not know 
you. but i know you now, and let me say that i should have known you 
long ago. i know that lucy told you of me. she told me of you too. 
may i make the only atonement in my power? take the cylinders and 
hear them. the first half-dozen of them are personal to me, and they 
will not horrify you. then you will know me better. dinner will by 
then be ready. in the meantime i shall read over some of these 
documents, and shall be better able to understand certain things." 
he carried the phonograph himself up to my sitting room and adjusted 
it for me. now i shall learn something pleasant, i am sure. for it 
will tell me the other side of a true love episode of which i know one 
side already. 
dr. seward's diary 
29 september.-i was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of jonathan 
harker and that other of his wife that i let the time run on without 
thinking. mrs. harker was not down when the maid came to announce 
dinner, so i said, "she is possibly tired. let dinner wait an hour," 
and i went on with my work. i had just finished mrs. harker's diary, 
when she came in. she looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her 
eyes were flushed with crying. this somehow moved me much. of late i 
have had cause for tears, god knows! but the relief of them was 
denied me, and now the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened by recent 
tears, went straight to my heart. so i said as gently as i could, "i 
greatly fear i have distressed you." 
"oh, no, not distressed me," she replied. "but i have been more 
touched than i can say by your grief. that is a wonderful machine, 
but it is cruelly true. it told me, in its very tones, the anguish of 
your heart. it was like a soul crying out to almighty god. no one 
must hear them spoken ever again! see, i have tried to be useful. i 
have copied out the words on my typewriter, and none other need now 
hear your heart beat, as i did." 
"no one need ever know, shall ever know," i said in a low voice. she 
laid her hand on mine and said very gravely, "ah, but they must!" 
"must! but why?" i asked. 
"because it is a part of the terrible story, a part of poor lucy's 
death and all that led to it. because in the struggle which we have 
before us to rid the earth of this terrible monster we must have all 
the knowledge and all the help which we can get. i think that the 
cylinders which you gave me contained more than you intended me to 
know. but i can see that there are in your record many lights to this 
dark mystery. you will let me help, will you not? i know all up to a 
certain point, and i see already, though your diary only took me to 7 
september, how poor lucy was beset, and how her terrible doom was 
being wrought out. jonathan and i have been working day and night 
since professor van helsing saw us. he is gone to whitby to get more 
information, and he will be here tomorrow to help us. we need have no 
secrets amongst us. working together and with absolute trust, we can 
surely be stronger than if some of us were in the dark." 
she looked at me so appealingly, and at the same time manifested such 
courage and resolution in her bearing, that i gave in at once to her 
wishes. "you shall," i said, "do as you like in the matter. god 
forgive me if i do wrong! there are terrible things yet to learn of, 
but if you have so far traveled on the road to poor lucy's death, you 
will not be content, i know, to remain in the dark. nay, the end, the 
very end, may give you a gleam of peace. come, there is dinner. we 
must keep one another strong for what is before us. we have a cruel 
and dreadful task. when you have eaten you shall learn the rest, and 
i shall answer any questions you ask, if there be anything which you 
do not understand, though it was apparent to us who were present." 
mina harker's journal 
29 september.-after dinner i came with dr. seward to his study. he 
brought back the phonograph from my room, and i took a chair, and 
arranged the phonograph so that i could touch it without getting up, 
and showed me how to stop it in case i should want to pause. then he 
very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to me, so that i might 
be as free as possible, and began to read. i put the forked metal to 
my ears and listened. 
when the terrible story of lucy's death, and all that followed, was 
done, i lay back in my chair powerless. fortunately i am not of a 
fainting disposition. when dr. seward saw me he jumped up with a 
horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case bottle from the 
cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few minutes somewhat 
restored me. my brain was all in a whirl, and only that there came 
through all the multitude of horrors, the holy ray of light that my 
dear lucy was at last at peace, i do not think i could have borne it 
without making a scene. it is all so wild and mysterious, and strange 
that if i had not known jonathan's experience in transylvania i could 
not have believed. as it was, i didn't know what to believe, and so 
got out of my difficulty by attending to something else. i took the 
cover off my typewriter, and said to dr. seward, 
"let me write this all out now. we must be ready for dr. van helsing 
when he comes. i have sent a telegram to jonathan to come on here 
when he arrives in london from whitby. in this matter dates are 
everything, and i think that if we get all of our material ready, and 
have every item put in chronological order, we shall have done much. 
"you tell me that lord godalming and mr. morris are coming too. let 
us be able to tell them when they come." 
he accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace, and i began to 
typewrite from the beginning of the seventeenth cylinder. i used 
manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as i had done 
with the rest. it was late when i got through, but dr. seward went 
about his work of going his round of the patients. when he had 
finished he came back and sat near me, reading, so that i did not feel 
too lonely whilst i worked. how good and thoughtful he is. the world 
seems full of good men, even if there are monsters in it. 
before i left him i remembered what jonathan put in his diary of the 
professor's perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at 
the station at exeter, so, seeing that dr. seward keeps his 
newspapers, i borrowed the files of 'the westminster gazette' and 'the 
pall mall gazette' and took them to my room. i remember how much the 
'dailygraph' and 'the whitby gazette', of which i had made cuttings, 
had helped us to understand the terrible events at whitby when count 
dracula landed, so i shall look through the evening papers since then, 
and perhaps i shall get some new light. i am not sleepy, and the work 
will help to keep me quiet. 
dr. seward's diary 
30 september.-mr. harker arrived at nine o'clock. he got his wife's 
wire just before starting. he is uncommonly clever, if one can judge 
from his face, and full of energy. if this journal be true, and 
judging by one's own wonderful experiences, it must be, he is also a 
man of great nerve. that going down to the vault a second time was a 
remarkable piece of daring. after reading his account of it i was 
prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet, 
businesslike gentleman who came here today. 
later.-after lunch harker and his wife went back to their own room, 
and as i passed a while ago i heard the click of the typewriter. they 
are hard at it. mrs. harker says that they are knitting together in 
chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. harker has got 
the letters between the consignee of the boxes at whitby and the 
carriers in london who took charge of them. he is now reading his 
wife's transcript of my diary. i wonder what they make out of it. 
here it is . . . 
strange that it never struck me that the very next house might be the 
count's hiding place! goodness knows that we had enough clues from 
the conduct of the patient renfield! the bundle of letters relating 
to the purchase of the house were with the transcript. oh, if we had 
only had them earlier we might have saved poor lucy! stop! that way 
madness lies! harker has gone back, and is again collecting material. 
he says that by dinner time they will be able to show a whole 
connected narrative. he thinks that in the meantime i should see 
renfield, as hitherto he has been a sort of index to the coming and 
going of the count. i hardly see this yet, but when i get at the 
dates i suppose i shall. what a good thing that mrs. harker put my 
cylinders into type! we never could have found the dates otherwise. 
i found renfield sitting placidly in his room with his hands folded, 
smiling benignly. at the moment he seemed as sane as any one i ever 
saw. i sat down and talked with him on a lot of subjects, all of 
which he treated naturally. he then, of his own accord, spoke of 
going home, a subject he has never mentioned to my knowledge during 
his sojourn here. in fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his 
discharge at once. i believe that, had i not had the chat with harker 
and read the letters and the dates of his outbursts, i should have 
been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation. as 
it is, i am darkly suspicious. all those out-breaks were in some way 
linked with the proximity of the count. what then does this absolute 
content mean? can it be that his instinct is satisfied as to the 
vampire's ultimate triumph? stay. he is himself zoophagous, and in 
his wild ravings outside the chapel door of the deserted house he 
always spoke of 'master'. this all seems confirmation of our idea. 
however, after a while i came away. my friend is just a little too 
sane at present to make it safe to probe him too deep with questions. 
he might begin to think, and then . . . so i came away. i mistrust 
these quiet moods of of his, so i have given the attendant a hint to 
look closely after him, and to have a strait waistcoat ready in case 
of need. 
johnathan harker's journal 
29 september, in train to london.-when i received mr. billington's 
courteous message that he would give me any information in his power i 
thought it best to go down to whitby and make, on the spot, such 
inquiries as i wanted. it was now my object to trace that horrid 
cargo of the count's to its place in london. later, we may be able to 
deal with it. billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the station, 
and brought me to his father's house, where they had decided that i 
must spend the night. they are hospitable, with true yorkshire 
hospitality, give a guest everything and leave him to do as he likes. 
they all knew that i was busy, and that my stay was short, and mr. 
billington had ready in his office all the papers concerning the 
consignment of boxes. it gave me almost a turn to see again one of 
the letters which i had seen on the count's table before i knew of his 
diabolical plans. everything had been carefully thought out, and done 
systematically and with precision. he seemed to have been prepared 
for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way of his 
intentions being carried out. to use an americanism, he had 'taken no 
chances', and the absolute accuracy with which his instructions were 
fulfilled was simply the logical result of his care. i saw the 
invoice, and took note of it. 'fifty cases of common earth, to be used 
for experimental purposes'. also the copy of the letter to carter 
paterson, and their reply. of both these i got copies. this was all 
the information mr. billington could give me, so i went down to the 
port and saw the coastguards, the customs officers and the harbour 
master, who kindly put me in communication with the men who had 
actually received the boxes. their tally was exact with the list, and 
they had nothing to add to the simple description 'fifty cases of 
common earth', except that the boxes were 'main and mortal heavy', and 
that shifting them was dry work. one of them added that it was hard 
lines that there wasn't any gentleman 'such like as like yourself, 
squire', to show some sort of appreciation of their efforts in a 
liquid form. another put in a rider that the thirst then generated 
was such that even the time which had elapsed had not completely 
allayed it. needless to add, i took care before leaving to lift, 
forever and adequately, this source of reproach. 
30 september.-the station master was good enough to give me a line to 
his old companion the station master at king's cross, so that when i 
arrived there in the morning i was able to ask him about the arrival 
of the boxes. he, too put me at once in communication with the proper 
officials, and i saw that their tally was correct with the original 
invoice. the opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been 
here limited. a noble use of them had, however, been made, and again 
i was compelled to deal with the result in ex post facto manner. 
from thence i went to carter paterson's central office, where i met 
with the utmost courtesy. they looked up the transaction in their day 
book and letter book, and at once telephoned to their king's cross 
office for more details. by good fortune, the men who did the teaming 
were waiting for work, and the official at once sent them over, 
sending also by one of them the way-bill and all the papers connected 
with the delivery of the boxes at carfax. here again i found the 
tally agreeing exactly. the carriers' men were able to supplement the 
paucity of the written words with a few more details. these were, i 
shortly found, connected almost solely with the dusty nature of the 
job, and the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. on my 
affording an opportunity, through the medium of the currency of the 
realm, of the allaying, at a later period, this beneficial evil, one 
of the men remarked, 
"that 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest i ever was in. blyme! but 
it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. there was dust that 
thick in the place that you might have slep' on it without 'urtin' of 
yer bones. an' the place was that neglected that yer might 'ave 
smelled ole jerusalem in it. but the old chapel, that took the cike, 
that did! me and my mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick 
enough. lor', i wouldn't take less nor a quid a moment to stay there 
arter dark." 
having been in the house, i could well believe him, but if he knew 
what i know, he would, i think have raised his terms. 
of one thing i am now satisfied. that all those boxes which arrived at 
whitby from varna in the demeter were safely deposited in the old 
chapel at carfax. there should be fifty of them there, unless any 
have since been removed, as from dr. seward's diary i fear. 
later.-mina and i have worked all day, and we have put all the papers 
into order. 
mina harker's journal 
30 september.-i am so glad that i hardly know how to contain myself. 
it is, i suppose, the reaction from the haunting fear which i have 
had, that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old wound 
might act detrimentally on jonathan. i saw him leave for whitby with 
as brave a face as could, but i was sick with apprehension. the 
effort has, however, done him good. he was never so resolute, never 
so strong, never so full of volcanic energy, as at present. it is 
just as that dear, good professor van helsing said, he is true grit, 
and he improves under strain that would kill a weaker nature. he came 
back full of life and hope and determination. we have got everything 
in order for tonight. i feel myself quite wild with excitement. i 
suppose one ought to pity anything so hunted as the count. that is 
just it. this thing is not human, not even a beast. to read dr. 
seward's account of poor lucy's death, and what followed, is enough to 
dry up the springs of pity in one's heart. 
later.-lord godalming and mr. morris arrived earlier than we 
expected. dr. seward was out on business, and had taken jonathan with 
him, so i had to see them. it was to me a painful meeting, for it 
brought back all poor dear lucy's hopes of only a few months ago. of 
course they had heard lucy speak of me, and it seemed that dr. van 
helsing, too, had been quite 'blowing my trumpet', as mr. morris 
expressed it. poor fellows, neither of them is aware that i know all 
about the proposals they made to lucy. they did not quite know what 
to say or do, as they were ignorant of the amount of my knowledge. so 
they had to keep on neutral subjects. however, i thought the matter 
over, and came to the conclusion that the best thing i could do would 
be to post them on affairs right up to date. i knew from dr. seward's 
diary that they had been at lucy's death, her real death, and that i 
need not fear to betray any secret before the time. so i told them, 
as well as i could, that i had read all the papers and diaries, and 
that my husband and i, having typewritten them, had just finished 
putting them in order. i gave them each a copy to read in the 
library. when lord godalming got his and turned it over, it does make 
a pretty good pile, he said, "did you write all this, mrs. harker?" 
i nodded, and he went on. 
"i don't quite see the drift of it, but you people are all so good and 
kind, and have been working so earnestly and so energetically, that 
all i can do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to help you. i 
have had one lesson already in accepting facts that should make a man 
humble to the last hour of his life. besides, i know you loved my 
lucy . . ." 
here he turned away and covered his face with his hands. i could hear 
the tears in his voice. mr. morris, with instinctive delicacy, just 
laid a hand for a moment on his shoulder, and then walked quietly out 
of the room. i suppose there is something in a woman's nature that 
makes a man free to break down before her and express his feelings on 
the tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his 
manhood. for when lord godalming found himself alone with me he sat 
down on the sofa and gave way utterly and openly. i sat down beside 
him and took his hand. i hope he didn't think it forward of me, and 
that if he ever thinks of it afterwards he never will have such a 
thought. there i wrong him. i know he never will. he is too true a 
gentleman. i said to him, for i could see that his heart was 
breaking, "i loved dear lucy, and i know what she was to you, and what 
you were to her. she and i were like sisters, and now she is gone, 
will you not let me be like a sister to you in your trouble? i know 
what sorrows you have had, though i cannot measure the depth of them. 
if sympathy and pity can help in your affliction, won't you let me be 
of some little service, for lucy's sake?" 
in an instant the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. it 
seemed to me that all that he had of late been suffering in silence 
found a vent at once. he grew quite hysterical, and raising his open 
hands, beat his palms together in a perfect agony of grief. he stood 
up and then sat down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. i 
felt an infinite pity for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly. with 
a sob he laid his head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, 
whilst he shook with emotion. 
we women have something of the mother in us that makes us rise above 
smaller matters when the mother spirit is invoked. i felt this big 
sorrowing man's head resting on me, as though it were that of a baby 
that some day may lie on my bosom, and i stroked his hair as though he 
were my own child. i never thought at the time how strange it all 
was. 
after a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an 
apology, though he made no disguise of his emotion. he told me that 
for days and nights past, weary days and sleepless nights, he had been 
unable to speak with any one, as a man must speak in his time of 
sorrow. there was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or 
with whom, owing to the terrible circumstance with which his sorrow 
was surrounded, he could speak freely. 
"i know now how i suffered," he said, as he dried his eyes, "but i do 
not know even yet, and none other can ever know, how much your sweet 
sympathy has been to me today. i shall know better in time, and 
believe me that, though i am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will 
grow with my understanding. you will let me be like a brother, will 
you not, for all our lives, for dear lucy's sake?" 
"for dear lucy's sake," i said as we clasped hands. "ay, and for your 
own sake," he added, "for if a man's esteem and gratitude are ever 
worth the winning, you have won mine today. if ever the future should 
bring to you a time when you need a man's help, believe me, you will 
not call in vain. god grant that no such time may ever come to you to 
break the sunshine of your life, but if it should ever come, promise 
me that you will let me know." 
he was so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that i felt it would 
comfort him, so i said, "i promise." 
as i came along the corridor i saw mr. morris looking out of a window. 
he turned as he heard my footsteps. "how is art?" he said. then 
noticing my red eyes, he went on, "ah, i see you have been comforting 
him. poor old fellow! he needs it. no one but a woman can help a 
man when he is in trouble of the heart, and he had no one to comfort 
him." 
he bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart bled for him. i saw 
the manuscript in his hand, and i knew that when he read it he would 
realize how much i knew, so i said to him, "i wish i could comfort all 
who suffer from the heart. will you let me be your friend, and will 
you come to me for comfort if you need it? you will know later why i 
speak." 
he saw that i was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand, and raising 
it to his lips, kissed it. it seemed but poor comfort to so brave and 
unselfish a soul, and impulsively i bent over and kissed him. the 
tears rose in his eyes, and there was a momentary choking in his 
throat. he said quite calmly, "little girl, you will never forget 
that true hearted kindness, so long as ever you live!" then he went 
into the study to his friend. 
"little girl!" the very words he had used to lucy, and, oh, but he 
proved himself a friend. 
chapter 18 
dr. seward's diary 
30 september.-i got home at five o'clock, and found that godalming 
and morris had not only arrived, but had already studied the 
transcript of the various diaries and letters which harker had not yet 
returned from his visit to the carriers' men, of whom dr. hennessey 
had written to me. mrs. harker gave us a cup of tea, and i can 
honestly say that, for the first time since i have lived in it, this 
old house seemed like home. when we had finished, mrs. harker said, 
"dr. seward, may i ask a favour? i want to see your patient, mr. 
renfield. do let me see him. what you have said of him in your diary 
interests me so much!" 
she looked so appealing and so pretty that i could not refuse her, and 
there was no possible reason why i should, so i took her with me. 
when i went into the room, i told the man that a lady would like to see 
him, to which he simply answered, "why?" 
"she is going through the house, and wants to see every one in it," i 
answered. 
"oh, very well," he said, "let her come in, by all means, but just 
wait a minute till i tidy up the place." 
his method of tidying was peculiar, he simply swallowed all the flies 
and spiders in the boxes before i could stop him. it was quite 
evident that he feared, or was jealous of, some interference. when he 
had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully, "let the lady 
come in," and sat down on the edge of his bed with his head down, but 
with his eyelids raised so that he could see her as she entered. for 
a moment i thought that he might have some homicidal intent. i 
remembered how quiet he had been just before he attacked me in my own 
study, and i took care to stand where i could seize him at once if he 
attempted to make a spring at her. 
she came into the room with an easy gracefulness which would at once 
command the respect of any lunatic, for easiness is one of the 
qualities mad people most respect. she walked over to him, smiling 
pleasantly, and held out her hand. 
"good evening, mr. renfield," said she. "you see, i know you, for dr. 
seward has told me of you." he made no immediate reply, but eyed her 
all over intently with a set frown on his face. this look gave way to 
one of wonder, which merged in doubt, then to my intense astonishment 
he said, "you're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? you 
can't be, you know, for she's dead." 
mrs. harker smiled sweetly as she replied, "oh no! i have a husband 
of my own, to whom i was married before i ever saw dr. seward, or he 
me. i am mrs. harker." 
"then what are you doing here?" 
"my husband and i are staying on a visit with dr. seward." 
"then don't stay." 
"but why not?" 
i thought that this style of conversation might not be pleasant to 
mrs. harker, any more than it was to me, so i joined in, "how did you 
know i wanted to marry anyone?" 
his reply was simply contemptuous, given in a pause in which he turned 
his eyes from mrs. harker to me, instantly turning them back again, 
"what an asinine question!" 
"i don't see that at all, mr. renfield," said mrs. harker, at once 
championing me. 
he replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as he had shown 
contempt to me, "you will, of course, understand, mrs. harker, that 
when a man is so loved and honoured as our host is, everything 
regarding him is of interest in our little community. dr. seward is 
loved not only by his household and his friends, but even by his 
patients, who, being some of them hardly in mental equilibrium, are 
apt to distort causes and effects. since i myself have been an inmate 
of a lunatic asylum, i cannot but notice that the sophistic tendencies 
of some of its inmates lean towards the errors of non causa and 
ignoratio elenche." 
i positively opened my eyes at this new development. here was my own 
pet lunatic, the most pronounced of his type that i had ever met with, 
talking elemental philosophy, and with the manner of a polished 
gentleman. i wonder if it was mrs. harker's presence which had 
touched some chord in his memory. if this new phase was spontaneous, 
or in any way due to her unconscious influence, she must have some 
rare gift or power. 
we continued to talk for some time, and seeing that he was seemingly 
quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me questioningly as she 
began, to lead him to his favourite topic. i was again astonished, 
for he addressed himself to the question with the impartiality of 
the completest sanity. he even took himself as an example when he 
mentioned certain things. 
"why, i myself am an instance of a man who had a strange belief. 
indeed, it was no wonder that my friends were alarmed, and insisted on 
my being put under control. i used to fancy that life was a positive 
and perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live 
things, no matter how low in the scale of creation, one might 
indefinitely prolong life. at times i held the belief so strongly 
that i actually tried to take human life. the doctor here will bear 
me out that on one occasion i tried to kill him for the purpose of 
strengthening my vital powers by the assimilation with my own body of 
his life through the medium of his blood, relying of course, upon the 
scriptural phrase, 'for the blood is the life.' though, indeed, the 
vendor of a certain nostrum has vulgarized the truism to the very 
point of contempt. isn't that true, doctor?" 
i nodded assent, for i was so amazed that i hardly knew what to either 
think or say, it was hard to imagine that i had seen him eat up his 
spiders and flies not five minutes before. looking at my watch, i saw 
that i should go to the station to meet van helsing, so i told mrs. 
harker that it was time to leave. 
she came at once, after saying pleasantly to mr. renfield, "goodbye, 
and i hope i may see you often, under auspices pleasanter to 
yourself." 
to which, to my astonishment, he replied, "goodbye, my dear. i pray 
god i may never see your sweet face again. may he bless and keep 
you!" 
when i went to the station to meet van helsing i left the boys behind 
me. poor art seemed more cheerful than he has been since lucy first 
took ill, and quincey is more like his own bright self than he has 
been for many a long day. 
van helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a 
boy. he saw me at once, and rushed up to me, saying, "ah, friend 
john, how goes all? well? so! i have been busy, for i come here to 
stay if need be. all affairs are settled with me, and i have much to 
tell. madam mina is with you? yes. and her so fine husband? and 
arthur and my friend quincey, they are with you, too? good!" 
as i drove to the house i told him of what had passed, and of how my 
own diary had come to be of some use through mrs. harker's suggestion, 
at which the professor interrupted me. 
"ah, that wonderful madam mina! she has man's brain, a brain that a 
man should have were he much gifted, and a woman's heart. the good 
god fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when he made that so good 
combination. friend john, up to now fortune has made that woman of 
help to us, after tonight she must not have to do with this so 
terrible affair. it is not good that she run a risk so great. we men 
are determined, nay, are we not pledged, to destroy this monster? but 
it is no part for a woman. even if she be not harmed, her heart may 
fail her in so much and so many horrors and hereafter she may suffer, 
both in waking, from her nerves, and in sleep, from her dreams. and, 
besides, she is young woman and not so long married, there may be 
other things to think of some time, if not now. you tell me she has 
wrote all, then she must consult with us, but tomorrow she say goodbye 
to this work, and we go alone." 
i agreed heartily with him, and then i told him what we had found in 
his absence, that the house which dracula had bought was the very next 
one to my own. he was amazed, and a great concern seemed to come on 
him. 
"oh that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we might have 
reached him in time to save poor lucy. however, 'the milk that is 
spilt cries not out afterwards,' as you say. we shall not think of 
that, but go on our way to the end." then he fell into a silence that 
lasted till we entered my own gateway. before we went to prepare for 
dinner he said to mrs. harker, "i am told, madam mina, by my friend 
john that you and your husband have put up in exact order all things 
that have been, up to this moment." 
"not up to this moment, professor," she said impulsively, "but up to 
this morning." 
"but why not up to now? we have seen hitherto how good light all the 
little things have made. we have told our secrets, and yet no one who 
has told is the worse for it." 
mrs. harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her pockets, she 
said, "dr. van helsing, will you read this, and tell me if it must go 
in. it is my record of today. i too have seen the need of putting 
down at present everything, however trivial, but there is little in 
this except what is personal. must it go in?" 
the professor read it over gravely, and handed it back, saying, "it 
need not go in if you do not wish it, but i pray that it may. it can 
but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, 
more honour you, as well as more esteem and love." she took it back 
with another blush and a bright smile. 
and so now, up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete 
and in order. the professor took away one copy to study after dinner, 
and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o'clock. the rest of 
us have already read everything, so when we meet in the study we shall 
all be informed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with 
this terrible and mysterious enemy. 
mina harker's journal 
30 september.-when we met in dr. seward's study two hours after 
dinner, which had been at six o'clock, we unconsciously formed a sort 
of board or committee. professor van helsing took the head of the 
table, to which dr. seward motioned him as he came into the room. he 
made me sit next to him on his right, and asked me to act as 
secretary. jonathan sat next to me. opposite us were lord godalming, 
dr. seward, and mr. morris, lord godalming being next the professor, 
and dr. seward in the centre. 
the professor said, "i may, i suppose, take it that we are all 
acquainted with the facts that are in these papers." we all expressed 
assent, and he went on, "then it were, i think, good that i tell you 
something of the kind of enemy with which we have to deal. i shall 
then make known to you something of the history of this man, which has 
been ascertained for me. so we then can discuss how we shall act, and 
can take our measure according. 
"there are such beings as vampires, some of us have evidence that they 
exist. even had we not the proof of our own unhappy experience, the 
teachings and the records of the past give proof enough for sane 
peoples. i admit that at the first i was sceptic. were it not that 
through long years i have trained myself to keep an open mind, i could 
not have believed until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. 'see! 
see! i prove, i prove.' alas! had i known at first what now i know, 
nay, had i even guess at him, one so precious life had been spared to 
many of us who did love her. but that is gone, and we must so work, 
that other poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. the nosferatu 
do not die like the bee when he sting once. he is only stronger, and 
being stronger, have yet more power to work evil. this vampire which 
is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men, he is 
of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages, he 
have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, 
the divination by the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to 
are for him at command; he is brute, and more than brute; he is devil 
in callous, and the heart of him is not; he can, within his range, 
direct the elements, the storm, the fog, the thunder; he can command 
all the meaner things, the rat, and the owl, and the bat, the moth, 
and the fox, and the wolf, he can grow and become small; and he can at 
times vanish and come unknown. how then are we to begin our strike to 
destroy him? how shall we find his where, and having found it, how 
can we destroy? my friends, this is much, it is a terrible task that 
we undertake, and there may be consequence to make the brave shudder. 
for if we fail in this our fight he must surely win, and then where 
end we? life is nothings, i heed him not. but to fail here, is not 
mere life or death. it is that we become as him, that we henceforward 
become foul things of the night like him, without heart or conscience, 
preying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best. to us 
forever are the gates of heaven shut, for who shall open them to us 
again? we go on for all time abhorred by all, a blot on the face of 
god's sunshine, an arrow in the side of him who died for man. but we 
are face to face with duty, and in such case must we shrink? for me, 
i say no, but then i am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair 
places, his song of birds, his music and his love, lie far behind. you 
others are young. some have seen sorrow, but there are fair days yet 
in store. what say you?" 
whilst he was speaking, jonathan had taken my hand. i feared, oh so 
much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when 
i saw his hand stretch out, but it was life to me to feel its touch, 
so strong, so self reliant, so resolute. a brave man's hand can speak 
for itself, it does not even need a woman's love to hear its music. 
when the professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, and 
i in his, there was no need for speaking between us. 
"i answer for mina and myself," he said. 
"count me in, professor," said mr. quincey morris, laconically as 
usual. 
"i am with you," said lord godalming, "for lucy's sake, if for no 
other reason." 
dr. seward simply nodded. 
the professor stood up and, after laying his golden crucifix on the 
table, held out his hand on either side. i took his right hand, and 
lord godalming his left, jonathan held my right with his left and 
stretched across to mr. morris. so as we all took hands our solemn 
compact was made. i felt my heart icy cold, but it did not even occur 
to me to draw back. we resumed our places, and dr. van helsing went 
on with a sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had 
begun. it was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way, 
as any other transaction of life. 
"well, you know what we have to contend against, but we too, are not 
without strength. we have on our side power of combination, a power 
denied to the vampire kind, we have sources of science, we are free to 
act and think, and the hours of the day and the night are ours 
equally. in fact, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, 
and we are free to use them. we have self devotion in a cause and an 
end to achieve which is not a selfish one. these things are much. 
"now let us see how far the general powers arrayed against us are 
restrict, and how the individual cannot. in fine, let us consider the 
limitations of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular. 
"all we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. these do 
not at the first appear much, when the matter is one of life and 
death, nay of more than either life or death. yet must we be 
satisfied, in the first place because we have to be, no other means is 
at our control, and secondly, because, after all these things, 
tradition and superstition, are everything. does not the belief in 
vampires rest for others, though not, alas! for us, on them? a year 
ago which of us would have received such a possibility, in the midst 
of our scientific, sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? we 
even scouted a belief that we saw justified under our very eyes. take 
it, then, that the vampire, and the belief in his limitations and his 
cure, rest for the moment on the same base. for, let me tell you, he 
is known everywhere that men have been. in old greece, in old rome, 
he flourish in germany all over, in france, in india, even in the 
chermosese, and in china, so far from us in all ways, there even is 
he, and the peoples for him at this day. he have follow the wake of 
the berserker icelander, the devil-begotten hun, the slav, the saxon, 
the magyar. 
"so far, then, we have all we may act upon, and let me tell you that 
very much of the beliefs are justified by what we have seen in our own 
so unhappy experience. the vampire live on, and cannot die by mere 
passing of the time, he can flourish when that he can fatten on the 
blood of the living. even more, we have seen amongst us that he can 
even grow younger, that his vital faculties grow strenuous, and seem 
as though they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. 
"but he cannot flourish without this diet, he eat not as others. even 
friend jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him eat, 
never! he throws no shadow, he make in the mirror no reflect, as 
again jonathan observe. he has the strength of many of his hand, 
witness again jonathan when he shut the door against the wolves, and 
when he help him from the diligence too. he can transform himself to 
wolf, as we gather from the ship arrival in whitby, when he tear open 
the dog, he can be as bat, as madam mina saw him on the window at 
whitby, and as friend john saw him fly from this so near house, and as 
my friend quincey saw him at the window of miss lucy. 
"he can come in mist which he create, that noble ship's captain proved 
him of this, but, from what we know, the distance he can make this 
mist is limited, and it can only be round himself. 
"he come on moonlight rays as elemental dust, as again jonathan saw 
those sisters in the castle of dracula. he become so small, we 
ourselves saw miss lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a 
hairbreadth space at the tomb door. he can, when once he find his 
way, come out from anything or into anything, no matter how close it 
be bound or even fused up with fire, solder you call it. he can see 
in the dark, no small power this, in a world which is one half shut 
from the light. ah, but hear me through. 
"he can do all these things, yet he is not free. nay, he is even more 
prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in his cell. 
he cannot go where he lists, he who is not of nature has yet to obey 
some of nature's laws, why we know not. he may not enter anywhere at 
the first, unless there be some one of the household who bid him to 
come, though afterwards he can come as he please. his power ceases, 
as does that of all evil things, at the coming of the day. 
"only at certain times can he have limited freedom. if he be not at 
the place whither he is bound, he can only change himself at noon or 
at exact sunrise or sunset. these things we are told, and in this 
record of ours we have proof by inference. thus, whereas he can do as 
he will within his limit, when he have his earth-home, his 
coffin-home, his hell-home, the place unhallowed, as we saw when he 
went to the grave of the suicide at whitby, still at other time he can 
only change when the time come. it is said, too, that he can only 
pass running water at the slack or the flood of the tide. then there 
are things which so afflict him that he has no power, as the garlic 
that we know of, and as for things sacred, as this symbol, my 
crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to them he is 
nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and silent 
with respect. there are others, too, which i shall tell you of, lest 
in our seeking we may need them. 
"the branch of wild rose on his coffin keep him that he move not from 
it, a sacred bullet fired into the coffin kill him so that he be true 
dead, and as for the stake through him, we know already of its peace, 
or the cut off head that giveth rest. we have seen it with our eyes. 
"thus when we find the habitation of this man-that-was, we can confine 
him to his coffin and destroy him, if we obey what we know. but he is 
clever. i have asked my friend arminius, of buda-pesth university, to 
make his record, and from all the means that are, he tell me of what 
he has been. he must, indeed, have been that voivode dracula who won 
his name against the turk, over the great river on the very frontier 
of turkeyland. if it be so, then was he no common man, for in that 
time, and for centuries after, he was spoken of as the cleverest and 
the most cunning, as well as the bravest of the sons of the 'land 
beyond the forest.' that mighty brain and that iron resolution went 
with him to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. the 
draculas were, says arminius, a great and noble race, though now and 
again were scions who were held by their coevals to have had dealings 
with the evil one. they learned his secrets in the scholomance, 
amongst the mountains over lake hermanstadt, where the devil claims 
the tenth scholar as his due. in the records are such words as 
'stregoica' witch, 'ordog' and 'pokol' satan and hell, and in one 
manuscript this very dracula is spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all 
understand too well. there have been from the loins of this very one 
great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where 
alone this foulness can dwell. for it is not the least of its terrors 
that this evil thing is rooted deep in all good, in soil barren of 
holy memories it cannot rest." 
whilst they were talking mr. morris was looking steadily at the 
window, and he now got up quietly, and went out of the room. there 
was a little pause, and then the professor went on. 
"and now we must settle what we do. we have here much data, and we 
must proceed to lay out our campaign. we know from the inquiry of 
jonathan that from the castle to whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all 
of which were delivered at carfax, we also know that at least some of 
these boxes have been removed. it seems to me, that our first step 
should be to ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond 
that wall where we look today, or whether any more have been removed. 
if the latter, we must trace . . ." 
here we were interrupted in a very startling way. outside the house 
came the sound of a pistol shot, the glass of the window was shattered 
with a bullet, which ricochetting from the top of the embrasure, 
struck the far wall of the room. i am afraid i am at heart a coward, 
for i shrieked out. the men all jumped to their feet, lord godalming 
flew over to the window and threw up the sash. as he did so we heard 
mr. morris' voice without, "sorry! i fear i have alarmed you. i 
shall come in and tell you about it." 
a minute later he came in and said, "it was an idiotic thing of me to 
do, and i ask your pardon, mrs. harker, most sincerely, i fear i must 
have frightened you terribly. but the fact is that whilst the 
professor was talking there came a big bat and sat on the window sill. 
i have got such a horror of the damned brutes from recent events that 
i cannot stand them, and i went out to have a shot, as i have been 
doing of late of evenings, whenever i have seen one. you used to 
laugh at me for it then, art." 
"did you hit it?" asked dr. van helsing. 
"i don't know, i fancy not, for it flew away into the wood." without 
saying any more he took his seat, and the professor began to resume 
his statement. 
"we must trace each of these boxes, and when we are ready, we must 
either capture or kill this monster in his lair, or we must, so to 
speak, sterilize the earth, so that no more he can seek safety in it. 
thus in the end we may find him in his form of man between the hours 
of noon and sunset, and so engage with him when he is at his most 
weak. 
"and now for you, madam mina, this night is the end until all be well. 
you are too precious to us to have such risk. when we part tonight, 
you no more must question. we shall tell you all in good time. we 
are men and are able to bear, but you must be our star and our hope, 
and we shall act all the more free that you are not in the danger, 
such as we are." 
all the men, even jonathan, seemed relieved, but it did not seem to me 
good that they should brave danger and, perhaps lessen their safety, 
strength being the best safety, through care of me, but their minds 
were made up, and though it was a bitter pill for me to swallow, i 
could say nothing, save to accept their chivalrous care of me. 
mr. morris resumed the discussion, "as there is no time to lose, i 
vote we have a look at his house right now. time is everything with 
him, and swift action on our part may save another victim." 
i own that my heart began to fail me when the time for action came so 
close, but i did not say anything, for i had a greater fear that if i 
appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave 
me out of their counsels altogether. they have now gone off to 
carfax, with means to get into the house. 
manlike, they had told me to go to bed and sleep, as if a woman can 
sleep when those she loves are in danger! i shall lie down, and 
pretend to sleep, lest jonathan have added anxiety about me when he 
returns. 
dr. seward's diary 
1 october, 4 a.m.-just as we were about to leave the house, an urgent 
message was brought to me from renfield to know if i would see him at 
once, as he had something of the utmost importance to say to me. i 
told the messenger to say that i would attend to his wishes in the 
morning, i was busy just at the moment. 
the attendant added, "he seems very importunate, sir. i have never 
seen him so eager. i don't know but what, if you don't see him soon, 
he will have one of his violent fits." i knew the man would not have 
said this without some cause, so i said, "all right, i'll go now," and 
i asked the others to wait a few minutes for me, as i had to go and 
see my patient. 
"take me with you, friend john," said the professor. "his case in your 
diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on our 
case. i should much like to see him, and especial when his mind is 
disturbed." 
"may i come also?" asked lord godalming. 
"me too?" said quincey morris. "may i come?" said harker. i nodded, 
and we all went down the passage together. 
we found him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more 
rational in his speech and manner than i had ever seen him. there was 
an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything i had 
ever met with in a lunatic, and he took it for granted that his 
reasons would prevail with others entirely sane. we all five went 
into the room, but none of the others at first said anything. his 
request was that i would at once release him from the asylum and send 
him home. this he backed up with arguments regarding his complete 
recovery, and adduced his own existing sanity. 
"i appeal to your friends," he said, "they will, perhaps, not mind 
sitting in judgement on my case. by the way, you have not introduced 
me." 
i was so much astonished, that the oddness of introducing a madman in 
an asylum did not strike me at the moment, and besides, there was a 
certain dignity in the man's manner, so much of the habit of equality, 
that i at once made the introduction, "lord godalming, professor van 
helsing, mr. quincey morris, of texas, mr. jonathan harker, mr. 
renfield." 
he shook hands with each of them, saying in turn, "lord godalming, i 
had the honour of seconding your father at the windham; i grieve to 
know, by your holding the title, that he is no more. he was a man 
loved and honoured by all who knew him, and in his youth was, i have 
heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much patronized on derby 
night. mr. morris, you should be proud of your great state. its 
reception into the union was a precedent which may have far-reaching 
effects hereafter, when the pole and the tropics may hold alliance to 
the stars and stripes. the power of treaty may yet prove a vast 
engine of enlargement, when the monroe doctrine takes its true place 
as a political fable. what shall any man say of his pleasure at 
meeting van helsing? sir, i make no apology for dropping all forms of 
conventional prefix. when an individual has revolutionized 
therapeutics by his discovery of the continuous evolution of brain 
matter, conventional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to 
limit him to one of a class. you, gentlemen, who by nationality, by 
heredity, or by the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold 
your respective places in the moving world, i take to witness that i 
am as sane as at least the majority of men who are in full possession 
of their liberties. and i am sure that you, dr. seward, humanitarian 
and medico-jurist as well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to 
deal with me as one to be considered as under exceptional 
circumstances." he made this last appeal with a courtly air of 
conviction which was not without its own charm. 
i think we were all staggered. for my own part, i was under the 
conviction, despite my knowledge of the man's character and history, 
that his reason had been restored, and i felt under a strong impulse 
to tell him that i was satisfied as to his sanity, and would see about 
the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. i thought 
it better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of 
old i knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was 
liable. so i contented myself with making a general statement that he 
appeared to be improving very rapidly, that i would have a longer chat 
with him in the morning, and would then see what i could do in the 
direction of meeting his wishes. 
this did not at all satisfy him, for he said quickly, "but i fear, dr. 
seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish. i desire to go at once, 
here, now, this very hour, this very moment, if i may. time presses, 
and in our implied agreement with the old scytheman it is of the 
essence of the contract. i am sure it is only necessary to put before 
so admirable a practitioner as dr. seward so simple, yet so momentous 
a wish, to ensure its fulfilment." 
he looked at me keenly, and seeing the negative in my face, turned to 
the others, and scrutinized them closely. not meeting any sufficient 
response, he went on, "is it possible that i have erred in my 
supposition?" 
"you have," i said frankly, but at the same time, as i felt, brutally. 
there was a considerable pause, and then he said slowly, "then i 
suppose i must only shift my ground of request. let me ask for this 
concession, boon, privilege, what you will. i am content to implore 
in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for the sake of others. i 
am not at liberty to give you the whole of my reasons, but you may, i 
assure you, take it from me that they are good ones, sound and 
unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. 
"could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the 
sentiments which animate me. nay, more, you would count me amongst 
the best and truest of your friends." 
again he looked at us all keenly. i had a growing conviction that 
this sudden change of his entire intellectual method was but yet 
another phase of his madness, and so determined to let him go on a 
little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like all 
lunatics, give himself away in the end. van helsing was gazing at him 
with a look of utmost intensity, his bushy eyebrows almost meeting 
with the fixed concentration of his look. he said to renfield in a 
tone which did not surprise me at the time, but only when i thought of 
it afterwards, for it was as of one addressing an equal, "can you not 
tell frankly your real reason for wishing to be free tonight? i will 
undertake that if you will satisfy even me, a stranger, without 
prejudice, and with the habit of keeping an open mind, dr. seward will 
give you, at his own risk and on his own responsibility, the privilege 
you seek." 
he shook his head sadly, and with a look of poignant regret on his 
face. the professor went on, "come, sir, bethink yourself. you claim 
the privilege of reason in the highest degree, since you seek to 
impress us with your complete reasonableness. you do this, whose 
sanity we have reason to doubt, since you are not yet released from 
medical treatment for this very defect. if you will not help us in 
our effort to choose the wisest course, how can we perform the duty 
which you yourself put upon us? be wise, and help us, and if we can 
we shall aid you to achieve your wish." 
he still shook his head as he said, "dr. van helsing, i have nothing to 
say. your argument is complete, and if i were free to speak i should 
not hesitate a moment, but i am not my own master in the matter. i 
can only ask you to trust me. if i am refused, the responsibility 
does not rest with me." 
i thought it was now time to end the scene, which was becoming too 
comically grave, so i went towards the door, simply saying, "come, my 
friends, we have work to do. goodnight." 
as, however, i got near the door, a new change came over the patient. 
he moved towards me so quickly that for the moment i feared that he 
was about to make another homicidal attack. my fears, however, were 
groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly, and made his 
petition in a moving manner. as he saw that the very excess of his 
emotion was militating against him, by restoring us more to our old 
relations, he became still more demonstrative. i glanced at van 
helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes, so i became a 
little more fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him 
that his efforts were unavailing. i had previously seen something of 
the same constantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some 
request of which at the time he had thought much, such for instance, 
as when he wanted a cat, and i was prepared to see the collapse into 
the same sullen acquiescence on this occasion. 
my expectation was not realized, for when he found that his appeal 
would not be successful, he got into quite a frantic condition. he 
threw himself on his knees, and held up his hands, wringing them in 
plaintive supplication, and poured forth a torrent of entreaty, with 
the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole face and form 
expressive of the deepest emotion. 
"let me entreat you, dr. seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me out 
of this house at once. send me away how you will and where you will, 
send keepers with me with whips and chains, let them take me in a 
strait waistcoat, manacled and leg-ironed, even to gaol, but let me go 
out of this. you don't know what you do by keeping me here. i am 
speaking from the depths of my heart, of my very soul. you don't know 
whom you wrong, or how, and i may not tell. woe is me! i may not 
tell. by all you hold sacred, by all you hold dear, by your love that 
is lost, by your hope that lives, for the sake of the almighty, take 
me out of this and save my soul from guilt! can't you hear me, man? 
can't you understand? will you never learn? don't you know that i am 
sane and earnest now, that i am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane 
man fighting for his soul? oh, hear me! hear me! let me go, let me 
go, let me go!" 
i thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so 
would bring on a fit, so i took him by the hand and raised him up. 
"come," i said sternly, "no more of this, we have had quite enough 
already. get to your bed and try to behave more discreetly." 
he suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for several moments. 
then, without a word, he rose and moving over, sat down on the side of 
the bed. the collapse had come, as on former occasions, just as i had 
expected. 
when i was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me in a 
quiet, well-bred voice, "you will, i trust, dr. seward, do me the 
justice to bear in mind, later on, that i did what i could to convince 
you tonight." 
chapter 19 
jonathan harker's journal 
1 october, 5 a.m.-i went with the party to the search with an easy 
mind, for i think i never saw mina so absolutely strong and well. i 
am so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do the work. 
somehow, it was a dread to me that she was in this fearful business at 
all, but now that her work is done, and that it is due to her energy 
and brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in such 
a way that every point tells, she may well feel that her part is 
finished, and that she can henceforth leave the rest to us. we were, 
i think, all a little upset by the scene with mr. renfield. when we 
came away from his room we were silent till we got back to the study. 
then mr. morris said to dr. seward, "say, jack, if that man wasn't 
attempting a bluff, he is about the sanest lunatic i ever saw. i'm 
not sure, but i believe that he had some serious purpose, and if he 
had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a chance." 
lord godalming and i were silent, but dr. van helsing added, "friend 
john, you know more lunatics than i do, and i'm glad of it, for i fear 
that if it had been to me to decide i would before that last 
hysterical outburst have given him free. but we live and learn, and 
in our present task we must take no chance, as my friend quincey would 
say. all is best as they are." 
dr. seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way, "i 
don't know but that i agree with you. if that man had been an 
ordinary lunatic i would have taken my chance of trusting him, but he 
seems so mixed up with the count in an indexy kind of way that i am 
afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. i can't forget 
how he prayed with almost equal fervor for a cat, and then tried to 
tear my throat out with his teeth. besides, he called the count 'lord 
and master', and he may want to get out to help him in some diabolical 
way. that horrid thing has the wolves and the rats and his own kind 
to help him, so i suppose he isn't above trying to use a respectable 
lunatic. he certainly did seem earnest, though. i only hope we have 
done what is best. these things, in conjunction with the wild work we 
have in hand, help to unnerve a man." 
the professor stepped over, and laying his hand on his shoulder, said 
in his grave, kindly way, "friend john, have no fear. we are trying 
to do our duty in a very sad and terrible case, we can only do as we 
deem best. what else have we to hope for, except the pity of the good 
god?" 
lord godalming had slipped away for a few minutes, but now he 
returned. he held up a little silver whistle as he remarked, "that 
old place may be full of rats, and if so, i've got an antidote on 
call." 
having passed the wall, we took our way to the house, taking care to 
keep in the shadows of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone 
out. when we got to the porch the professor opened his bag and took 
out a lot of things, which he laid on the step, sorting them into four 
little groups, evidently one for each. then he spoke. 
"my friends, we are going into a terrible danger, and we need arms of 
many kinds. our enemy is not merely spiritual. remember that he has 
the strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our 
windpipes are of the common kind, and therefore breakable or 
crushable, his are not amenable to mere strength. a stronger man, or 
a body of men more strong in all than him, can at certain times hold 
him, but they cannot hurt him as we can be hurt by him. we must, 
therefore, guard ourselves from his touch. keep this near your 
heart." as he spoke he lifted a little silver crucifix and held it 
out to me, i being nearest to him, "put these flowers round your 
neck," here he handed to me a wreath of withered garlic blossoms, "for 
other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this knife, and for aid 
in all, these so small electric lamps, which you can fasten to your 
breast, and for all, and above all at the last, this, which we must 
not desecrate needless." 
this was a portion of sacred wafer, which he put in an envelope and 
handed to me. each of the others was similarly equipped. 
"now," he said, "friend john, where are the skeleton keys? if so that 
we can open the door, we need not break house by the window, as before 
at miss lucy's." 
dr. seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as 
a surgeon standing him in good stead. presently he got one to suit, 
after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and with a 
rusty clang, shot back. we pressed on the door, the rusty hinges 
creaked, and it slowly opened. it was startlingly like the image 
conveyed to me in dr. seward's diary of the opening of miss westenra's 
tomb, i fancy that the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with 
one accord they shrank back. the professor was the first to move 
forward, and stepped into the open door. 
"in manus tuas, domine!" he said, crossing himself as he passed over 
the threshold. we closed the door behind us, lest when we should have 
lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. the 
professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be able to open 
it from within should we be in a hurry making our exit. then we all 
lit our lamps and proceeded on our search. 
the light from the tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd forms, as the 
rays crossed each other, or the opacity of our bodies threw great 
shadows. i could not for my life get away from the feeling that there 
was someone else amongst us. i suppose it was the recollection, so 
powerfully brought home to me by the grim surroundings, of that 
terrible experience in transylvania. i think the feeling was common 
to us all, for i noticed that the others kept looking over their 
shoulders at every sound and every new shadow, just as i felt myself 
doing. 
the whole place was thick with dust. the floor was seemingly inches 
deep, except where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding 
down my lamp i could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. 
the walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and in the corners were 
masses of spider's webs, whereon the dust had gathered till they 
looked like old tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. 
on a table in the hall was a great bunch of keys, with a time-yellowed 
label on each. they had been used several times, for on the table 
were several similar rents in the blanket of dust, similar to that 
exposed when the professor lifted them. 
he turned to me and said, "you know this place, jonathan. you have 
copied maps of it, and you know it at least more than we do. which is 
the way to the chapel?" 
i had an idea of its direction, though on my former visit i had not 
been able to get admission to it, so i led the way, and after a few 
wrong turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed 
with iron bands. 
"this is the spot," said the professor as he turned his lamp on a 
small map of the house, copied from the file of my original 
correspondence regarding the purchase. with a little trouble we found 
the key on the bunch and opened the door. we were prepared for some 
unpleasantness, for as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous 
air seemed to exhale through the gaps, but none of us ever expected 
such an odour as we encountered. none of the others had met the count 
at all at close quarters, and when i had seen him he was either in the 
fasting stage of his existence in his rooms or, when he was bloated 
with fresh blood, in a ruined building open to the air, but here the 
place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the air 
stagnant and foul. there was an earthy smell, as of some dry miasma, 
which came through the fouler air. but as to the odour itself, how 
shall i describe it? it was not alone that it was composed of all the 
ills of mortality and with the pungent, acrid smell of blood, but it 
seemed as though corruption had become itself corrupt. faugh! it 
sickens me to think of it. every breath exhaled by that monster 
seemed to have clung to the place and intensified its loathsomeness. 
under ordinary circumstances such a stench would have brought our 
enterprise to an end, but this was no ordinary case, and the high and 
terrible purpose in which we were involved gave us a strength which 
rose above merely physical considerations. after the involuntary 
shrinking consequent on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set 
about our work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses. 
we made an accurate examination of the place, the professor saying as 
we began, "the first thing is to see how many of the boxes are left, 
we must then examine every hole and corner and cranny and see if we 
cannot get some clue as to what has become of the rest." 
a glance was sufficient to show how many remained, for the great earth 
chests were bulky, and there was no mistaking them. 
there were only twenty-nine left out of the fifty! once i got a 
fright, for, seeing lord godalming suddenly turn and look out of the 
vaulted door into the dark passage beyond, i looked too, and for an 
instant my heart stood still. somewhere, looking out from the shadow, 
i seemed to see the high lights of the count's evil face, the ridge of 
the nose, the red eyes, the red lips, the awful pallor. it was only 
for a moment, for, as lord godalming said, "i thought i saw a face, 
but it was only the shadows," and resumed his inquiry, i turned my 
lamp in the direction, and stepped into the passage. there was no 
sign of anyone, and as there were no corners, no doors, no aperture of 
any kind, but only the solid walls of the passage, there could be no 
hiding place even for him. i took it that fear had helped 
imagination, and said nothing. 
a few minutes later i saw morris step suddenly back from a corner, 
which he was examining. we all followed his movements with our eyes, 
for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we saw a whole 
mass of phosphorescence, which twinkled like stars. we all 
instinctively drew back. the whole place was becoming alive with 
rats. 
for a moment or two we stood appalled, all save lord godalming, who 
was seemingly prepared for such an emergency. rushing over to the 
great iron-bound oaken door, which dr. seward had described from the 
outside, and which i had seen myself, he turned the key in the lock, 
drew the huge bolts, and swung the door open. then, taking his little 
silver whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. it was 
answered from behind dr. seward's house by the yelping of dogs, and 
after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of 
the house. unconsciously we had all moved towards the door, and as we 
moved i noticed that the dust had been much disturbed. the boxes 
which had been taken out had been brought this way. but even in the 
minute that had elapsed the number of the rats had vastly increased. 
they seemed to swarm over the place all at once, till the lamplight, 
shining on their moving dark bodies and glittering, baleful eyes, made 
the place look like a bank of earth set with fireflies. the dogs 
dashed on, but at the threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and 
then, simultaneously lifting their noses, began to howl in most 
lugubrious fashion. the rats were multiplying in thousands, and we 
moved out. 
lord godalming lifted one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him 
on the floor. the instant his feet touched the ground he seemed to 
recover his courage, and rushed at his natural enemies. they fled 
before him so fast that before he had shaken the life out of a score, 
the other dogs, who had by now been lifted in the same manner, had but 
small prey ere the whole mass had vanished. 
with their going it seemed as if some evil presence had departed, for 
the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at 
their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over and tossed them in 
the air with vicious shakes. we all seemed to find our spirits rise. 
whether it was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening 
of the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding 
ourselves in the open i know not, but most certainly the shadow of 
dread seemed to slip from us like a robe, and the occasion of our 
coming lost something of its grim significance, though we did not 
slacken a whit in our resolution. we closed the outer door and barred 
and locked it, and bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the 
house. we found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary 
proportions, and all untouched save for my own footsteps when i had 
made my first visit. never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of 
uneasiness, and even when we returned to the chapel they frisked about 
as though they had been rabbit hunting in a summer wood. 
the morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front. 
dr. van helsing had taken the key of the hall door from the bunch, and 
locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket 
when he had done. 
"so far," he said, "our night has been eminently successful. no harm 
has come to us such as i feared might be and yet we have ascertained 
how many boxes are missing. more than all do i rejoice that this, our 
first, and perhaps our most difficult and dangerous, step has been 
accomplished without the bringing thereinto our most sweet madam mina 
or troubling her waking or sleeping thoughts with sights and sounds 
and smells of horror which she might never forget. one lesson, too, 
we have learned, if it be allowable to argue a particulari, that the 
brute beasts which are to the count's command are yet themselves not 
amenable to his spiritual power, for look, these rats that would come 
to his call, just as from his castle top he summon the wolves to your 
going and to that poor mother's cry, though they come to him, they run 
pell-mell from the so little dogs of my friend arthur. we have other 
matters before us, other dangers, other fears, and that monster . . . 
he has not used his power over the brute world for the only or the 
last time tonight. so be it that he has gone elsewhere. good! it 
has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess 
game, which we play for the stake of human souls. and now let us go 
home. the dawn is close at hand, and we have reason to be content 
with our first night's work. it may be ordained that we have many 
nights and days to follow, if full of peril, but we must go on, and 
from no danger shall we shrink." 
the house was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who 
was screaming away in one of the distant wards, and a low, moaning 
sound from renfield's room. the poor wretch was doubtless torturing 
himself, after the manner of the insane, with needless thoughts of 
pain. 
i came tiptoe into our own room, and found mina asleep, breathing so 
softly that i had to put my ear down to hear it. she looks paler than 
usual. i hope the meeting tonight has not upset her. i am truly 
thankful that she is to be left out of our future work, and even of 
our deliberations. it is too great a strain for a woman to bear. i 
did not think so at first, but i know better now. therefore i am glad 
that it is settled. there may be things which would frighten her to 
hear, and yet to conceal them from her might be worse than to tell her 
if once she suspected that there was any concealment. henceforth our 
work is to be a sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can 
tell her that all is finished, and the earth free from a monster of 
the nether world. i daresay it will be difficult to begin to keep 
silence after such confidence as ours, but i must be resolute, and 
tomorrow i shall keep dark over tonight's doings, and shall refuse to 
speak of anything that has happened. i rest on the sofa, so as not to 
disturb her. 
1 october, later.-i suppose it was natural that we should have all 
overslept ourselves, for the day was a busy one, and the night had no 
rest at all. even mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though i 
slept till the sun was high, i was awake before her, and had to call 
two or three times before she awoke. indeed, she was so sound asleep 
that for a few seconds she did not recognize me, but looked at me with 
a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been waked out of a bad 
dream. she complained a little of being tired, and i let her rest 
till later in the day. we now know of twenty-one boxes having been 
removed, and if it be that several were taken in any of these removals 
we may be able to trace them all. such will, of course, immensely 
simplify our labor, and the sooner the matter is attended to the 
better. i shall look up thomas snelling today. 
dr. seward's diary 
1 october.-it was towards noon when i was awakened by the professor 
walking into my room. he was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and 
it is quite evident that last night's work has helped to take some of 
the brooding weight off his mind. 
after going over the adventure of the night he suddenly said, "your 
patient interests me much. may it be that with you i visit him this 
morning? or if that you are too occupy, i can go alone if it may be. 
it is a new experience to me to find a lunatic who talk philosophy, 
and reason so sound." 
i had some work to do which pressed, so i told him that if he would go 
alone i would be glad, as then i should not have to keep him waiting, 
so i called an attendant and gave him the necessary instructions. 
before the professor left the room i cautioned him against getting any 
false impression from my patient. 
"but," he answered, "i want him to talk of himself and of his delusion 
as to consuming live things. he said to madam mina, as i see in your 
diary of yesterday, that he had once had such a belief. why do you 
smile, friend john?" 
"excuse me," i said, "but the answer is here." i laid my hand on the 
typewritten matter. "when our sane and learned lunatic made that very 
statement of how he used to consume life, his mouth was actually 
nauseous with the flies and spiders which he had eaten just before 
mrs. harker entered the room." 
van helsing smiled in turn. "good!" he said. "your memory is true, 
friend john. i should have remembered. and yet it is this very 
obliquity of thought and memory which makes mental disease such a 
fascinating study. perhaps i may gain more knowledge out of the folly 
of this madman than i shall from the teaching of the most wise. who 
knows?" 
i went on with my work, and before long was through that in hand. it 
seemed that the time had been very short indeed, but there was van 
helsing back in the study. 
"do i interrupt?" he asked politely as he stood at the door. 
"not at all," i answered. "come in. my work is finished, and i am 
free. i can go with you now, if you like." 
"it is needless, i have seen him!" 
"well?" 
"i fear that he does not appraise me at much. our interview was 
short. when i entered his room he was sitting on a stool in the 
centre, with his elbows on his knees, and his face was the picture of 
sullen discontent. i spoke to him as cheerfully as i could, and with 
such a measure of respect as i could assume. he made no reply 
whatever. 'don't you know me?' i asked. his answer was not 
reassuring: 'i know you well enough; you are the old fool van 
helsing. i wish you would take yourself and your idiotic brain 
theories somewhere else. damn all thick-headed dutchmen!' not a word 
more would he say, but sat in his implacable sullenness as indifferent 
to me as though i had not been in the room at all. thus departed for 
this time my chance of much learning from this so clever lunatic, so i 
shall go, if i may, and cheer myself with a few happy words with that 
sweet soul madam mina. friend john, it does rejoice me unspeakable 
that she is no more to be pained, no more to be worried with our 
terrible things. though we shall much miss her help, it is better 
so." 
"i agree with you with all my heart," i answered earnestly, for i did 
not want him to weaken in this matter. "mrs. harker is better out of 
it. things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and who 
have been in many tight places in our time, but it is no place for a 
woman, and if she had remained in touch with the affair, it would in 
time infallibly have wrecked her." 
so van helsing has gone to confer with mrs. harker and harker, quincey 
and art are all out following up the clues as to the earth boxes. i 
shall finish my round of work and we shall meet tonight. 
mina harker's journal 
1 october.-it is strange to me to be kept in the dark as i am today, 
after jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him 
manifestly avoid certain matters, and those the most vital of all. 
this morning i slept late after the fatigues of yesterday, and though 
jonathan was late too, he was the earlier. he spoke to me before he 
went out, never more sweetly or tenderly, but he never mentioned a 
word of what had happened in the visit to the count's house. and yet 
he must have known how terribly anxious i was. poor dear fellow! i 
suppose it must have distressed him even more than it did me. they 
all agreed that it was best that i should not be drawn further into 
this awful work, and i acquiesced. but to think that he keeps 
anything from me! and now i am crying like a silly fool, when i know 
it comes from my husband's great love and from the good, good wishes 
of those other strong men. 
that has done me good. well, some day jonathan will tell me all. and 
lest it should ever be that he should think for a moment that i kept 
anything from him, i still keep my journal as usual. then if he has 
feared of my trust i shall show it to him, with every thought of my 
heart put down for his dear eyes to read. i feel strangely sad and 
low-spirited today. i suppose it is the reaction from the terrible 
excitement. 
last night i went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they 
told me to. i didn't feel sleepy, and i did feel full of devouring 
anxiety. i kept thinking over everything that has been ever since 
jonathan came to see me in london, and it all seems like a horrible 
tragedy, with fate pressing on relentlessly to some destined end. 
everything that one does seems, no matter how right it may be, to bring 
on the very thing which is most to be deplored. if i hadn't gone to 
whitby, perhaps poor dear lucy would be with us now. she hadn't taken 
to visiting the churchyard till i came, and if she hadn't come there 
in the day time with me she wouldn't have walked in her sleep. and if 
she hadn't gone there at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have 
destroyed her as he did. oh, why did i ever go to whitby? there now, 
crying again! i wonder what has come over me today. i must hide it 
from jonathan, for if he knew that i had been crying twice in one 
morning . . . i, who never cried on my own account, and whom he has 
never caused to shed a tear, the dear fellow would fret his heart out. 
i shall put a bold face on, and if i do feel weepy, he shall never see 
it. i suppose it is just one of the lessons that we poor women have 
to learn . . . 
i can't quite remember how i fell asleep last night. i remember 
hearing the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of queer sounds, like 
praying on a very tumultuous scale, from mr. renfield's room, which is 
somewhere under this. and then there was silence over everything, 
silence so profound that it startled me, and i got up and looked out 
of the window. all was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by 
the moonlight seeming full of a silent mystery of their own. not a 
thing seemed to be stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or 
fate, so that a thin streak of white mist, that crept with almost 
imperceptible slowness across the grass towards the house, seemed to 
have a sentience and a vitality of its own. i think that the 
digression of my thoughts must have done me good, for when i got back 
to bed i found a lethargy creeping over me. i lay a while, but could 
not quite sleep, so i got out and looked out of the window again. the 
mist was spreading, and was now close up to the house, so that i could 
see it lying thick against the wall, as though it were stealing up to 
the windows. the poor man was more loud than ever, and though i could 
not distinguish a word he said, i could in some way recognize in his 
tones some passionate entreaty on his part. then there was the sound 
of a struggle, and i knew that the attendants were dealing with him. 
i was so frightened that i crept into bed, and pulled the clothes over 
my head, putting my fingers in my ears. i was not then a bit sleepy, 
at least so i thought, but i must have fallen asleep, for except 
dreams, i do not remember anything until the morning, when jonathan 
woke me. i think that it took me an effort and a little time to 
realize where i was, and that it was jonathan who was bending over me. 
my dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of the way that 
waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams. 
i thought that i was asleep, and waiting for jonathan to come back. i 
was very anxious about him, and i was powerless to act, my feet, and 
my hands, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at 
the usual pace. and so i slept uneasily and thought. then it began 
to dawn upon me that the air was heavy, and dank, and cold. i put 
back the clothes from my face, and found, to my surprise, that all was 
dim around. the gaslight which i had left lit for jonathan, but 
turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which 
had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. then it 
occurred to me that i had shut the window before i had come to bed. i 
would have got out to make certain on the point, but some leaden 
lethargy seemed to chain my limbs and even my will. i lay still and 
endured, that was all. i closed my eyes, but could still see through 
my eyelids. (it is wonderful what tricks our dreams play us, and how 
conveniently we can imagine.) the mist grew thicker and thicker and i 
could see now how it came in, for i could see it like smoke, or with 
the white energy of boiling water, pouring in, not through the window, 
but through the joinings of the door. it got thicker and thicker, 
till it seemed as if it became concentrated into a sort of pillar of 
cloud in the room, through the top of which i could see the light of 
the gas shining like a red eye. things began to whirl through my 
brain just as the cloudy column was now whirling in the room, and 
through it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud by day and 
of fire by night." was it indeed such spiritual guidance that was 
coming to me in my sleep? but the pillar was composed of both the day 
and the night guiding, for the fire was in the red eye, which at the 
thought got a new fascination for me, till, as i looked, the fire 
divided, and seemed to shine on me through the fog like two red eyes, 
such as lucy told me of in her momentary mental wandering when, on the 
cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of st. mary's church. 
suddenly the horror burst upon me that it was thus that jonathan had 
seen those awful women growing into reality through the whirling mist 
in the moonlight, and in my dream i must have fainted, for all became 
black darkness. the last conscious effort which imagination made was 
to show me a livid white face bending over me out of the mist. 
i must be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if 
there were too much of them. i would get dr. van helsing or dr. 
seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only 
that i fear to alarm them. such a dream at the present time would 
become woven into their fears for me. tonight i shall strive hard to 
sleep naturally. if i do not, i shall tomorrow night get them to give 
me a dose of chloral, that cannot hurt me for once, and it will give 
me a good night's sleep. last night tired me more than if i had not 
slept at all. 
2 october 10 p.m.-last night i slept, but did not dream. i must have 
slept soundly, for i was not waked by jonathan coming to bed, but the 
sleep has not refreshed me, for today i feel terribly weak and 
spiritless. i spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down 
dozing. in the afternoon, mr. renfield asked if he might see me. poor 
man, he was very gentle, and when i came away he kissed my hand and 
bade god bless me. some way it affected me much. i am crying when i 
think of him. this is a new weakness, of which i must be careful. 
jonathan would be miserable if he knew i had been crying. he and the 
others were out till dinner time, and they all came in tired. i did 
what i could to brighten them up, and i suppose that the effort did me 
good, for i forgot how tired i was. after dinner they sent me to bed, 
and all went off to smoke together, as they said, but i knew that they 
wanted to tell each other of what had occurred to each during the day. 
i could see from jonathan's manner that he had something important to 
communicate. i was not so sleepy as i should have been, so before 
they went i asked dr. seward to give me a little opiate of some kind, 
as i had not slept well the night before. he very kindly made me up a 
sleeping draught, which he gave to me, telling me that it would do me 
no harm, as it was very mild . . . i have taken it, and am waiting for 
sleep, which still keeps aloof. i hope i have not done wrong, for as 
sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear comes: that i may have been 
foolish in thus depriving myself of the power of waking. i might want 
it. here comes sleep. goodnight. 
chapter 20 
jonathan harker's journal 
1 october, evening.-i found thomas snelling in his house at bethnal 
green, but unhappily he was not in a condition to remember anything. 
the very prospect of beer which my expected coming had opened to him 
had proved too much, and he had begun too early on his expected 
debauch. i learned, however, from his wife, who seemed a decent, poor 
soul, that he was only the assistant of smollet, who of the two mates 
was the responsible person. so off i drove to walworth, and found mr. 
joseph smollet at home and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out 
of a saucer. he is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, 
reliable type of workman, and with a headpiece of his own. he 
remembered all about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful 
dog-eared notebook, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle 
about the seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries 
in thick, half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the 
boxes. there were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from 
carfax and left at 197 chicksand street, mile end new town, and 
another six which he deposited at jamaica lane, bermondsey. if then 
the count meant to scatter these ghastly refuges of his over london, 
these places were chosen as the first of delivery, so that later he 
might distribute more fully. the systematic manner in which this was 
done made me think that he could not mean to confine himself to two 
sides of london. he was now fixed on the far east on the northern 
shore, on the east of the southern shore, and on the south. the north 
and west were surely never meant to be left out of his diabolical 
scheme, let alone the city itself and the very heart of fashionable 
london in the south-west and west. i went back to smollet, and asked 
him if he could tell us if any other boxes had been taken from carfax. 
he replied, "well guv'nor, you've treated me very 'an'some", i had 
given him half a sovereign, "an i'll tell yer all i know. i heard a 
man by the name of bloxam say four nights ago in the 'are an' 'ounds, 
in pincher's alley, as 'ow he an' his mate 'ad 'ad a rare dusty job in 
a old 'ouse at purfleet. there ain't a many such jobs as this 'ere, 
an' i'm thinkin' that maybe sam bloxam could tell ye summut." 
i asked if he could tell me where to find him. i told him that if he 
could get me the address it would be worth another half sovereign to 
him. so he gulped down the rest of his tea and stood up, saying that 
he was going to begin the search then and there. 
at the door he stopped, and said, "look 'ere, guv'nor, there ain't no 
sense in me a keepin' you 'ere. i may find sam soon, or i mayn't, but 
anyhow he ain't like to be in a way to tell ye much tonight. sam is a 
rare one when he starts on the booze. if you can give me a envelope 
with a stamp on it, and put yer address on it, i'll find out where sam 
is to be found and post it ye tonight. but ye'd better be up arter 
'im soon in the mornin', never mind the booze the night afore." 
this was all practical, so one of the children went off with a penny 
to buy an envelope and a sheet of paper, and to keep the change. when 
she came back, i addressed the envelope and stamped it, and when 
smollet had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, 
i took my way to home. we're on the track anyhow. i am tired 
tonight, and i want to sleep. mina is fast asleep, and looks a little 
too pale. her eyes look as though she had been crying. poor dear, 
i've no doubt it frets her to be kept in the dark, and it may make her 
doubly anxious about me and the others. but it is best as it is. it 
is better to be disappointed and worried in such a way now than to 
have her nerve broken. the doctors were quite right to insist on her 
being kept out of this dreadful business. i must be firm, for on me 
this particular burden of silence must rest. i shall not ever enter 
on the subject with her under any circumstances. indeed, it may not 
be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the 
subject, and has not spoken of the count or his doings ever since we 
told her of our decision. 
2 october, evening-a long and trying and exciting day. by the first 
post i got my directed envelope with a dirty scrap of paper enclosed, 
on which was written with a carpenter's pencil in a sprawling hand, 
"sam bloxam, korkrans, 4 poters cort, bartel street, walworth. arsk 
for the depite." 
i got the letter in bed, and rose without waking mina. she looked 
heavy and sleepy and pale, and far from well. i determined not to 
wake her, but that when i should return from this new search, i would 
arrange for her going back to exeter. i think she would be happier in 
our own home, with her daily tasks to interest her, than in being here 
amongst us and in ignorance. i only saw dr. seward for a moment, and 
told him where i was off to, promising to come back and tell the rest 
so soon as i should have found out anything. i drove to walworth and 
found, with some difficulty, potter's court. mr. smollet's spelling 
misled me, as i asked for poter's court instead of potter's court. 
however, when i had found the court, i had no difficulty in 
discovering corcoran's lodging house. 
when i asked the man who came to the door for the "depite," he shook 
his head, and said, "i dunno 'im. there ain't no such a person 'ere. 
i never 'eard of 'im in all my bloomin' days. don't believe there 
ain't nobody of that kind livin' 'ere or anywheres." 
i took out smollet's letter, and as i read it it seemed to me that the 
lesson of the spelling of the name of the court might guide me. "what 
are you?" i asked. 
"i'm the depity," he answered. 
i saw at once that i was on the right track. phonetic spelling had 
again misled me. a half crown tip put the deputy's knowledge at my 
disposal, and i learned that mr. bloxam, who had slept off the remains 
of his beer on the previous night at corcoran's, had left for his work 
at poplar at five o'clock that morning. he could not tell me where 
the place of work was situated, but he had a vague idea that it was 
some kind of a "new-fangled ware'us," and with this slender clue i had 
to start for poplar. it was twelve o'clock before i got any 
satisfactory hint of such a building, and this i got at a coffee shop, 
where some workmen were having their dinner. one of them suggested 
that there was being erected at cross angel street a new "cold 
storage" building, and as this suited the condition of a "new-fangled 
ware'us," i at once drove to it. an interview with a surly gatekeeper 
and a surlier foreman, both of whom were appeased with the coin of the 
realm, put me on the track of bloxam. he was sent for on my 
suggestion that i was willing to pay his days wages to his foreman for 
the privilege of asking him a few questions on a private matter. he 
was a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. when i 
had promised to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he 
told me that he had made two journeys between carfax and a house in 
piccadilly, and had taken from this house to the latter nine great 
boxes, "main heavy ones," with a horse and cart hired by him for this 
purpose. 
i asked him if he could tell me the number of the house in piccadilly, 
to which he replied, "well, guv'nor, i forgits the number, but it was 
only a few door from a big white church, or somethink of the kind, not 
long built. it was a dusty old 'ouse, too, though nothin' to the 
dustiness of the 'ouse we tooked the bloomin' boxes from." 
"how did you get in if both houses were empty?" 
"there was the old party what engaged me a waitin' in the 'ouse at 
purfleet. he 'elped me to lift the boxes and put them in the dray. 
curse me, but he was the strongest chap i ever struck, an' him a old 
feller, with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he 
couldn't throw a shadder." 
how this phrase thrilled through me! 
"why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and 
me a puffin' an' a blowin' afore i could upend mine anyhow, an' i'm no 
chicken, neither." 
"how did you get into the house in piccadilly?" i asked. 
"he was there too. he must 'a started off and got there afore me, for 
when i rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door 'isself an' 'elped 
me carry the boxes into the 'all." 
"the whole nine?" i asked. 
"yus, there was five in the first load an' four in the second. it was 
main dry work, an' i don't so well remember 'ow i got 'ome." 
i interrupted him, "were the boxes left in the hall?" 
"yus, it was a big 'all, an' there was nothin' else in it." 
i made one more attempt to further matters. "you didn't have any 
key?" 
"never used no key nor nothink. the old gent, he opened the door 
'isself an' shut it again when i druv off. i don't remember the last 
time, but that was the beer." 
"and you can't remember the number of the house?" 
"no, sir. but ye needn't have no difficulty about that. it's a 'igh 
'un with a stone front with a bow on it, an' 'igh steps up to the 
door. i know them steps, 'avin' 'ad to carry the boxes up with three 
loafers what come round to earn a copper. the old gent give them 
shillin's, an' they seein' they got so much, they wanted more. but 'e 
took one of them by the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the 
steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'." 
i thought that with this description i could find the house, so having 
paid my friend for his information, i started off for piccadilly. i 
had gained a new painful experience. the count could, it was evident, 
handle the earth boxes himself. if so, time was precious, for now 
that he had achieved a certain amount of distribution, he could, by 
choosing his own time, complete the task unobserved. at piccadilly 
circus i discharged my cab, and walked westward. beyond the junior 
constitutional i came across the house described and was satisfied 
that this was the next of the lairs arranged by dracula. the house 
looked as though it had been long untenanted. the windows were 
encrusted with dust, and the shutters were up. all the framework was 
black with time, and from the iron the paint had mostly scaled away. 
it was evident that up to lately there had been a large notice board 
in front of the balcony. it had, however, been roughly torn away, the 
uprights which had supported it still remaining. behind the rails of 
the balcony i saw there were some loose boards, whose raw edges looked 
white. i would have given a good deal to have been able to see the 
notice board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to the 
ownership of the house. i remembered my experience of the investigation 
and purchase of carfax, and i could not but feel that if i could find 
the former owner there might be some means discovered of gaining access 
to the house. 
there was at present nothing to be learned from the piccadilly side, 
and nothing could be done, so i went around to the back to see if 
anything could be gathered from this quarter. the mews were active, 
the piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. i asked one or two 
of the grooms and helpers whom i saw around if they could tell me 
anything about the empty house. one of them said that he heard it had 
lately been taken, but he couldn't say from whom. he told me, 
however, that up to very lately there had been a notice board of "for 
sale" up, and that perhaps mitchell, sons, & candy the house agents 
could tell me something, as he thought he remembered seeing the name 
of that firm on the board. i did not wish to seem too eager, or to 
let my informant know or guess too much, so thanking him in the usual 
manner, i strolled away. it was now growing dusk, and the autumn 
night was closing in, so i did not lose any time. having learned the 
address of mitchell, sons, & candy from a directory at the berkeley, i 
was soon at their office in sackville street. 
the gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but 
uncommunicative in equal proportion. having once told me that the 
piccadilly house, which throughout our interview he called a 
"mansion," was sold, he considered my business as concluded. when i 
asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes a thought wider, and 
paused a few seconds before replying, "it is sold, sir." 
"pardon me," i said, with equal politeness, "but i have a special 
reason for wishing to know who purchased it." 
again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still more. "it is 
sold, sir," was again his laconic reply. 
"surely," i said, "you do not mind letting me know so much." 
"but i do mind," he answered. "the affairs of their clients are 
absolutely safe in the hands of mitchell, sons, & candy." 
this was manifestly a prig of the first water, and there was no use 
arguing with him. i thought i had best meet him on his own ground, so 
i said, "your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian 
of their confidence. i am myself a professional man." 
here i handed him my card. "in this instance i am not prompted by 
curiosity, i act on the part of lord godalming, who wishes to know 
something of the property which was, he understood, lately for sale." 
these words put a different complexion on affairs. he said, "i would 
like to oblige you if i could, mr. harker, and especially would i like 
to oblige his lordship. we once carried out a small matter of renting 
some chambers for him when he was the honourable arthur holmwood. if 
you will let me have his lordship's address i will consult the house 
on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his lordship 
by tonight's post. it will be a pleasure if we can so far deviate 
from our rules as to give the required information to his lordship." 
i wanted to secure a friend, and not to make an enemy, so i thanked 
him, gave the address at dr. seward's and came away. it was now dark, 
and i was tired and hungry. i got a cup of tea at the aerated bread 
company and came down to purfleet by the next train. 
i found all the others at home. mina was looking tired and pale, but 
she made a gallant effort to be bright and cheerful. it wrung my 
heart to think that i had had to keep anything from her and so caused 
her inquietude. thank god, this will be the last night of her looking 
on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our 
confidence. it took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of 
keeping her out of our grim task. she seems somehow more reconciled, 
or else the very subject seems to have become repugnant to her, for 
when any accidental allusion is made she actually shudders. i am glad 
we made our resolution in time, as with such a feeling as this, our 
growing knowledge would be torture to her. 
i could not tell the others of the day's discovery till we were alone, 
so after dinner, followed by a little music to save appearances even 
amongst ourselves, i took mina to her room and left her to go to bed. 
the dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and clung to me 
as though she would detain me, but there was much to be talked of and 
i came away. thank god, the ceasing of telling things has made no 
difference between us. 
when i came down again i found the others all gathered round the fire 
in the study. in the train i had written my diary so far, and simply 
read it off to them as the best means of letting them get abreast of 
my own information. 
when i had finished van helsing said, "this has been a great day's 
work, friend jonathan. doubtless we are on the track of the missing 
boxes. if we find them all in that house, then our work is near the 
end. but if there be some missing, we must search until we find them. 
then shall we make our final coup, and hunt the wretch to his real 
death." 
we all sat silent awhile and all at once mr. morris spoke, "say! how 
are we going to get into that house?" 
"we got into the other," answered lord godalming quickly. 
"but, art, this is different. we broke house at carfax, but we had 
night and a walled park to protect us. it will be a mighty different 
thing to commit burglary in piccadilly, either by day or night. i 
confess i don't see how we are going to get in unless that agency duck 
can find us a key of some sort." 
lord godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up and walked about the 
room. by-and-by he stopped and said, turning from one to another of 
us, "quincey's head is level. this burglary business is getting 
serious. we got off once all right, but we have now a rare job on 
hand. unless we can find the count's key basket." 
as nothing could well be done before morning, and as it would be at 
least advisable to wait till lord godalming should hear from 
mitchell's, we decided not to take any active step before breakfast 
time. for a good while we sat and smoked, discussing the matter in 
its various lights and bearings. i took the opportunity of bringing 
this diary right up to the moment. i am very sleepy and shall go to 
bed . . . 
just a line. mina sleeps soundly and her breathing is regular. her 
forehead is puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks 
even in her sleep. she is still too pale, but does not look so 
haggard as she did this morning. tomorrow will, i hope, mend all 
this. she will be herself at home in exeter. oh, but i am sleepy! 
dr. seward's diary 
1 october.-i am puzzled afresh about renfield. his moods change so 
rapidly that i find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they 
always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more 
than interesting study. this morning, when i went to see him after 
his repulse of van helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding 
destiny. he was, in fact, commanding destiny, subjectively. he did 
not really care for any of the things of mere earth, he was in the 
clouds and looked down on all the weaknesses and wants of us poor 
mortals. 
i thought i would improve the occasion and learn something, so i asked 
him, "what about the flies these times?" 
he smiled on me in quite a superior sort of way, such a smile as would 
have become the face of malvolio, as he answered me, "the fly, my dear 
sir, has one striking feature. it's wings are typical of the aerial 
powers of the psychic faculties. the ancients did well when they 
typified the soul as a butterfly!" 
i thought i would push his analogy to its utmost logically, so i said 
quickly, "oh, it is a soul you are after now, is it?" 
his madness foiled his reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face 
as, shaking his head with a decision which i had but seldom seen in 
him. 
he said, "oh, no, oh no! i want no souls. life is all i want." here 
he brightened up. "i am pretty indifferent about it at present. life 
is all right. i have all i want. you must get a new patient, doctor, 
if you wish to study zoophagy!" 
this puzzled me a little, so i drew him on. "then you command life. 
you are a god, i suppose?" 
he smiled with an ineffably benign superiority. "oh no! far be it 
from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the deity. i am not 
even concerned in his especially spiritual doings. if i may state my 
intellectual position i am, so far as concerns things purely 
terrestrial, somewhat in the position which enoch occupied 
spiritually!" 
this was a poser to me. i could not at the moment recall enoch's 
appositeness, so i had to ask a simple question, though i felt that by 
so doing i was lowering myself in the eyes of the lunatic. "and why 
with enoch?" 
"because he walked with god." 
i could not see the analogy, but did not like to admit it, so i harked 
back to what he had denied. "so you don't care about life and you 
don't want souls. why not?" i put my question quickly and somewhat 
sternly, on purpose to disconcert him. 
the effort succeeded, for an instant he unconsciously relapsed into 
his old servile manner, bent low before me, and actually fawned upon 
me as he replied. "i don't want any souls, indeed, indeed! i don't. 
i couldn't use them if i had them. they would be no manner of use to 
me. i couldn't eat them or . . ." 
he suddenly stopped and the old cunning look spread over his face, 
like a wind sweep on the surface of the water. 
"and doctor, as to life, what is it after all? when you've got all 
you require, and you know that you will never want, that is all. i 
have friends, good friends, like you, dr. seward." this was said with 
a leer of inexpressible cunning. "i know that i shall never lack the 
means of life!" 
i think that through the cloudiness of his insanity he saw some 
antagonism in me, for he at once fell back on the last refuge of such 
as he, a dogged silence. after a short time i saw that for the 
present it was useless to speak to him. he was sulky, and so i came 
away. 
later in the day he sent for me. ordinarily i would not have come 
without special reason, but just at present i am so interested in him 
that i would gladly make an effort. besides, i am glad to have 
anything to help pass the time. harker is out, following up clues, 
and so are lord godalming and quincey. van helsing sits in my study 
poring over the record prepared by the harkers. he seems to think 
that by accurate knowledge of all details he will light up on some 
clue. he does not wish to be disturbed in the work, without cause. i 
would have taken him with me to see the patient, only i thought that 
after his last repulse he might not care to go again. there was also 
another reason. renfield might not speak so freely before a third 
person as when he and i were alone. 
i found him sitting in the middle of the floor on his stool, a pose 
which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. when 
i came in, he said at once, as though the question had been waiting on 
his lips. "what about souls?" 
it was evident then that my surmise had been correct. unconscious 
cerebration was doing its work, even with the lunatic. i determined 
to have the matter out. 
"what about them yourself?" i asked. 
he did not reply for a moment but looked all around him, and up and 
down, as though he expected to find some inspiration for an answer. 
"i don't want any souls!" he said in a feeble, apologetic way. the 
matter seemed preying on his mind, and so i determined to use it, to 
"be cruel only to be kind." so i said, "you like life, and you want 
life?" 
"oh yes! but that is all right. you needn't worry about that!" 
"but," i asked, "how are we to get the life without getting the soul 
also?" 
this seemed to puzzle him, so i followed it up, "a nice time you'll 
have some time when you're flying out here, with the souls of 
thousands of flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing and 
twittering and moaning all around you. you've got their lives, you 
know, and you must put up with their souls!" 
something seemed to affect his imagination, for he put his fingers to 
his ears and shut his eyes, screwing them up tightly just as a small 
boy does when his face is being soaped. there was something pathetic 
in it that touched me. it also gave me a lesson, for it seemed that 
before me was a child, only a child, though the features were worn, 
and the stubble on the jaws was white. it was evident that he was 
undergoing some process of mental disturbance, and knowing how his 
past moods had interpreted things seemingly foreign to himself, i 
thought i would enter into his mind as well as i could and go with him. 
the first step was to restore confidence, so i asked him, speaking 
pretty loud so that he would hear me through his closed ears, "would 
you like some sugar to get your flies around again?" 
he seemed to wake up all at once, and shook his head. with a laugh he 
replied, "not much! flies are poor things, after all!" after a pause 
he added, "but i don't want their souls buzzing round me, all the 
same." 
"or spiders?" i went on. 
"blow spiders! what's the use of spiders? there isn't anything in 
them to eat or . . ." he stopped suddenly as though reminded of a 
forbidden topic. 
"so, so!" i thought to myself, "this is the second time he has 
suddenly stopped at the word 'drink'. what does it mean?" 
renfield seemed himself aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried 
on, as though to distract my attention from it, "i don't take any 
stock at all in such matters. 'rats and mice and such small deer,' as 
shakespeare has it, 'chicken feed of the larder' they might be called. 
i'm past all that sort of nonsense. you might as well ask a man to 
eat molecules with a pair of chopsticks, as to try to interest me 
about the less carnivora, when i know of what is before me." 
"i see," i said. "you want big things that you can make your teeth 
meet in? how would you like to breakfast on an elephant?" 
"what ridiculous nonsense you are talking?" he was getting too wide 
awake, so i thought i would press him hard. 
"i wonder," i said reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!" 
the effect i desired was obtained, for he at once fell from his 
high-horse and became a child again. 
"i don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. for a 
few moments he sat despondently. suddenly he jumped to his feet, with 
his eyes blazing and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. 
"to hell with you and your souls!" he shouted. "why do you plague me 
about souls? haven't i got enough to worry, and pain, to distract me 
already, without thinking of souls?" 
he looked so hostile that i thought he was in for another homicidal 
fit, so i blew my whistle. 
the instant, however, that i did so he became calm, and said 
apologetically, "forgive me, doctor. i forgot myself. you do not 
need any help. i am so worried in my mind that i am apt to be 
irritable. if you only knew the problem i have to face, and that i am 
working out, you would pity, and tolerate, and pardon me. pray do not 
put me in a strait waistcoat. i want to think and i cannot think 
freely when my body is confined. i am sure you will understand!" 
he had evidently self-control, so when the attendants came i told them 
not to mind, and they withdrew. renfield watched them go. when the 
door was closed he said with considerable dignity and sweetness, "dr. 
seward, you have been very considerate towards me. believe me that i 
am very, very grateful to you!" 
i thought it well to leave him in this mood, and so i came away. 
there is certainly something to ponder over in this man's state. 
several points seem to make what the american interviewer calls "a 
story," if one could only get them in proper order. here they are: 
will not mention "drinking." 
fears the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. 
has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. 
despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads 
being haunted by their souls. 
logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of 
some kind that he will acquire some higher life. 
he dreads the consequence, the burden of a soul. then it is a 
human life he looks to! 
and the assurance . . .? 
merciful god! the count has been to him, and there is some new scheme 
of terror afoot! 
later.-i went after my round to van helsing and told him my 
suspicion. he grew very grave, and after thinking the matter over for 
a while asked me to take him to renfield. i did so. as we came to 
the door we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to do 
in the time which now seems so long ago. 
when we entered we saw with amazement that he had spread out his sugar 
as of old. the flies, lethargic with the autumn, were beginning to 
buzz into the room. we tried to make him talk of the subject of our 
previous conversation, but he would not attend. he went on with his 
singing, just as though we had not been present. he had got a scrap 
of paper and was folding it into a notebook. we had to come away as 
ignorant as we went in. 
his is a curious case indeed. we must watch him tonight. 
letter, mitchell, sons & candy to lord godalming. 
"1 october. 
"my lord, 
"we are at all times only too happy to meet your wishes. we beg, 
with regard to the desire of your lordship, expressed by mr. 
harker on your behalf, to supply the following information 
concerning the sale and purchase of no. 347, piccadilly. the 
original vendors are the executors of the late mr. archibald 
winter-suffield. the purchaser is a foreign nobleman, count de 
ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the purchase 
money in notes 'over the counter,' if your lordship will pardon 
us using so vulgar an expression. beyond this we know nothing 
whatever of him. 
"we are, my lord, 
"your lordship's humble servants, 
"mitchell, sons & candy." 
dr. seward's diary 
2 october.-i placed a man in the corridor last night, and told him to 
make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from renfield's room, 
and gave him instructions that if there should be anything strange he 
was to call me. after dinner, when we had all gathered round the fire 
in the study, mrs. harker having gone to bed, we discussed the 
attempts and discoveries of the day. harker was the only one who had 
any result, and we are in great hopes that his clue may be an 
important one. 
before going to bed i went round to the patient's room and looked in 
through the observation trap. he was sleeping soundly, his heart rose 
and fell with regular respiration. 
this morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after 
midnight he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. 
i asked him if that was all. he replied that it was all he heard. 
there was something about his manner, so suspicious that i asked him 
point blank if he had been asleep. he denied sleep, but admitted to 
having "dozed" for a while. it is too bad that men cannot be trusted 
unless they are watched. 
today harker is out following up his clue, and art and quincey are 
looking after horses. godalming thinks that it will be well to have 
horses always in readiness, for when we get the information which we 
seek there will be no time to lose. we must sterilize all the 
imported earth between sunrise and sunset. we shall thus catch the 
count at his weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. van helsing is 
off to the british museum looking up some authorities on ancient 
medicine. the old physicians took account of things which their 
followers do not accept, and the professor is searching for witch and 
demon cures which may be useful to us later. 
i sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity 
in strait waistcoats. 
later.-we have met again. we seem at last to be on the track, and 
our work of tomorrow may be the beginning of the end. i wonder if 
renfield's quiet has anything to do with this. his moods have so 
followed the doings of the count, that the coming destruction of the 
monster may be carried to him some subtle way. if we could only get 
some hint as to what passed in his mind, between the time of my 
argument with him today and his resumption of fly-catching, it might 
afford us a valuable clue. he is now seemingly quiet for a spell . . . 
is he? that wild yell seemed to come from his room . . . 
the attendant came bursting into my room and told me that renfield had 
somehow met with some accident. he had heard him yell, and when he 
went to him found him lying on his face on the floor, all covered with 
blood. i must go at once . . . 
chapter 21 
dr. seward's diary 
3 october.-let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well 
as i can remember, since last i made an entry. not a detail that i 
can recall must be forgotten. in all calmness i must proceed. 
when i came to renfield's room i found him lying on the floor on his 
left side in a glittering pool of blood. when i went to move him, it 
became at once apparent that he had received some terrible injuries. 
there seemed none of the unity of purpose between the parts of the 
body which marks even lethargic sanity. as the face was exposed i 
could see that it was horribly bruised, as though it had been beaten 
against the floor. indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool 
of blood originated. 
the attendant who was kneeling beside the body said to me as we turned 
him over, "i think, sir, his back is broken. see, both his right arm 
and leg and the whole side of his face are paralysed." how such a 
thing could have happened puzzled the attendant beyond measure. he 
seemed quite bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said, "i 
can't understand the two things. he could mark his face like that by 
beating his own head on the floor. i saw a young woman do it once at 
the eversfield asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. and i 
suppose he might have broken his neck by falling out of bed, if he got 
in an awkward kink. but for the life of me i can't imagine how the 
two things occurred. if his back was broke, he couldn't beat his 
head, and if his face was like that before the fall out of bed, there 
would be marks of it." 
i said to him, "go to dr. van helsing, and ask him to kindly come here 
at once. i want him without an instant's delay." 
the man ran off, and within a few minutes the professor, in his 
dressing gown and slippers, appeared. when he saw renfield on the 
ground, he looked keenly at him a moment, and then turned to me. i 
think he recognized my thought in my eyes, for he said very quietly, 
manifestly for the ears of the attendant, "ah, a sad accident! he 
will need very careful watching, and much attention. i shall stay 
with you myself, but i shall first dress myself. if you will remain i 
shall in a few minutes join you." 
the patient was now breathing stertorously and it was easy to see that 
he had suffered some terrible injury. 
van helsing returned with extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a 
surgical case. he had evidently been thinking and had his mind made 
up, for almost before he looked at the patient, he whispered to me, 
"send the attendant away. we must be alone with him when he becomes 
conscious, after the operation." 
i said, "i think that will do now, simmons. we have done all that we 
can at present. you had better go your round, and dr. van helsing 
will operate. let me know instantly if there be anything unusual 
anywhere." 
the man withdrew, and we went into a strict examination of the 
patient. the wounds of the face were superficial. the real injury 
was a depressed fracture of the skull, extending right up through the 
motor area. 
the professor thought a moment and said, "we must reduce the pressure 
and get back to normal conditions, as far as can be. the rapidity of 
the suffusion shows the terrible nature of his injury. the whole 
motor area seems affected. the suffusion of the brain will increase 
quickly, so we must trephine at once or it may be too late." 
as he was speaking there was a soft tapping at the door. i went over 
and opened it and found in the corridor without, arthur and quincey in 
pajamas and slippers; the former spoke, "i heard your man call up dr. 
van helsing and tell him of an accident. so i woke quincey or rather 
called for him as he was not asleep. things are moving too quickly 
and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us these times. i've 
been thinking that tomorrow night will not see things as they have 
been. we'll have to look back, and forward a little more than we have 
done. may we come in?" 
i nodded, and held the door open till they had entered, then i closed 
it again. when quincey saw the attitude and state of the patient, and 
noted the horrible pool on the floor, he said softly, "my god! what 
has happened to him? poor, poor devil!" 
i told him briefly, and added that we expected he would recover 
consciousness after the operation, for a short time, at all events. 
he went at once and sat down on the edge of the bed, with godalming 
beside him. we all watched in patience. 
"we shall wait," said van helsing, "just long enough to fix the best 
spot for trephining, so that we may most quickly and perfectly remove 
the blood clot, for it is evident that the haemorrhage is increasing." 
the minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. i 
had a horrible sinking in my heart, and from van helsing's face i 
gathered that he felt some fear or apprehension as to what was to 
come. i dreaded the words renfield might speak. i was positively 
afraid to think. but the conviction of what was coming was on me, as 
i have read of men who have heard the death watch. the poor man's 
breathing came in uncertain gasps. each instant he seemed as though 
he would open his eyes and speak, but then would follow a prolonged 
stertorous breath, and he would relapse into a more fixed 
insensibility. inured as i was to sick beds and death, this suspense 
grew and grew upon me. i could almost hear the beating of my own 
heart, and the blood surging through my temples sounded like blows 
from a hammer. the silence finally became agonizing. i looked at my 
companions, one after another, and saw from their flushed faces and 
damp brows that they were enduring equal torture. there was a nervous 
suspense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would peal 
out powerfully when we should least expect it. 
at last there came a time when it was evident that the patient was 
sinking fast. he might die at any moment. i looked up at the 
professor and caught his eyes fixed on mine. his face was sternly set 
as he spoke, "there is no time to lose. his words may be worth many 
lives. i have been thinking so, as i stood here. it may be there is 
a soul at stake! we shall operate just above the ear." 
without another word he made the operation. for a few moments the 
breathing continued to be stertorous. then there came a breath so 
prolonged that it seemed as though it would tear open his chest. 
suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare. 
this was continued for a few moments, then it was softened into a glad 
surprise, and from his lips came a sigh of relief. he moved 
convulsively, and as he did so, said, "i'll be quiet, doctor. tell 
them to take off the strait waistcoat. i have had a terrible dream, 
and it has left me so weak that i cannot move. what's wrong with my 
face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts dreadfully." 
he tried to turn his head, but even with the effort his eyes seemed to 
grow glassy again so i gently put it back. then van helsing said in a 
quiet grave tone, "tell us your dream, mr. renfield." 
as he heard the voice his face brightened, through its mutilation, and 
he said, "that is dr. van helsing. how good it is of you to be here. 
give me some water, my lips are dry, and i shall try to tell you. i 
dreamed . . ." 
he stopped and seemed fainting. i called quietly to quincey, "the 
brandy, it is in my study, quick!" he flew and returned with a glass, 
the decanter of brandy and a carafe of water. we moistened the 
parched lips, and the patient quickly revived. 
it seemed, however, that his poor injured brain had been working in 
the interval, for when he was quite conscious, he looked at me 
piercingly with an agonized confusion which i shall never forget, and 
said, "i must not deceive myself. it was no dream, but all a grim 
reality." then his eyes roved round the room. as they caught sight 
of the two figures sitting patiently on the edge of the bed he went 
on, "if i were not sure already, i would know from them." 
for an instant his eyes closed, not with pain or sleep but 
voluntarily, as though he were bringing all his faculties to bear. 
when he opened them he said, hurriedly, and with more energy than he 
had yet displayed, "quick, doctor, quick, i am dying! i feel that i 
have but a few minutes, and then i must go back to death, or worse! 
wet my lips with brandy again. i have something that i must say 
before i die. or before my poor crushed brain dies anyhow. thank 
you! it was that night after you left me, when i implored you to let 
me go away. i couldn't speak then, for i felt my tongue was tied. 
but i was as sane then, except in that way, as i am now. i was in an 
agony of despair for a long time after you left me, it seemed hours. 
then there came a sudden peace to me. my brain seemed to become cool 
again, and i realized where i was. i heard the dogs bark behind our 
house, but not where he was!" 
as he spoke, van helsing's eyes never blinked, but his hand came out 
and met mine and gripped it hard. he did not, however, betray 
himself. he nodded slightly and said, "go on," in a low voice. 
renfield proceeded. "he came up to the window in the mist, as i had 
seen him often before, but he was solid then, not a ghost, and his 
eyes were fierce like a man's when angry. he was laughing with his 
red mouth, the sharp white teeth glinted in the moonlight when he 
turned to look back over the belt of trees, to where the dogs were 
barking. i wouldn't ask him to come in at first, though i knew he 
wanted to, just as he had wanted all along. then he began promising 
me things, not in words but by doing them." 
he was interrupted by a word from the professor, "how?" 
"by making them happen. just as he used to send in the flies when the 
sun was shining. great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their 
wings. and big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bones on 
their backs." 
van helsing nodded to him as he whispered to me unconsciously, "the 
acherontia atropos of the sphinges, what you call the 'death's-head 
moth'?" 
the patient went on without stopping, "then he began to whisper. 'rats, 
rats, rats! hundreds, thousands, millions of them, and every one a 
life. and dogs to eat them, and cats too. all lives! all red blood, 
with years of life in it, and not merely buzzing flies!' i laughed at 
him, for i wanted to see what he could do. then the dogs howled, away 
beyond the dark trees in his house. he beckoned me to the window. i 
got up and looked out, and he raised his hands, and seemed to call out 
without using any words. a dark mass spread over the grass, coming on 
like the shape of a flame of fire. and then he moved the mist to the 
right and left, and i could see that there were thousands of rats with 
their eyes blazing red, like his only smaller. he held up his hand, 
and they all stopped, and i thought he seemed to be saying, 'all these 
lives will i give you, ay, and many more and greater, through 
countless ages, if you will fall down and worship me!' and then a red 
cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close over my eyes, and 
before i knew what i was doing, i found myself opening the sash and 
saying to him, 'come in, lord and master!' the rats were all gone, but 
he slid into the room through the sash, though it was only open an 
inch wide, just as the moon herself has often come in through the 
tiniest crack and has stood before me in all her size and splendour." 
his voice was weaker, so i moistened his lips with the brandy again, 
and he continued, but it seemed as though his memory had gone on 
working in the interval for his story was further advanced. i was 
about to call him back to the point, but van helsing whispered to me, 
"let him go on. do not interrupt him. he cannot go back, and maybe 
could not proceed at all if once he lost the thread of his thought." 
he proceeded, "all day i waited to hear from him, but he did not send 
me anything, not even a blowfly, and when the moon got up i was pretty 
angry with him. when he did slide in through the window, though it 
was shut, and did not even knock, i got mad with him. he sneered at 
me, and his white face looked out of the mist with his red eyes 
gleaming, and he went on as though he owned the whole place, and i was 
no one. he didn't even smell the same as he went by me. i couldn't 
hold him. i thought that, somehow, mrs. harker had come into the 
room." 
the two men sitting on the bed stood up and came over, standing behind 
him so that he could not see them, but where they could hear better. 
they were both silent, but the professor started and quivered. his 
face, however, grew grimmer and sterner still. renfield went on 
without noticing, "when mrs. harker came in to see me this afternoon 
she wasn't the same. it was like tea after the teapot has been 
watered." here we all moved, but no one said a word. 
he went on, "i didn't know that she was here till she spoke, and she 
didn't look the same. i don't care for the pale people. i like them 
with lots of blood in them, and hers all seemed to have run out. i 
didn't think of it at the time, but when she went away i began to 
think, and it made me mad to know that he had been taking the life out 
of her." i could feel that the rest quivered, as i did; but we 
remained otherwise still. "so when he came tonight i was ready for 
him. i saw the mist stealing in, and i grabbed it tight. i had heard 
that madmen have unnatural strength. and as i knew i was a madman, at 
times anyhow, i resolved to use my power. ay, and he felt it too, for 
he had to come out of the mist to struggle with me. i held tight, and 
i thought i was going to win, for i didn't mean him to take any more 
of her life, till i saw his eyes. they burned into me, and my 
strength became like water. he slipped through it, and when i tried 
to cling to him, he raised me up and flung me down. there was a red 
cloud before me, and a noise like thunder, and the mist seemed to 
steal away under the door." 
his voice was becoming fainter and his breath more stertorous. van 
helsing stood up instinctively. 
"we know the worst now," he said. "he is here, and we know his 
purpose. it may not be too late. let us be armed, the same as we 
were the other night, but lose no time, there is not an instant to 
spare." 
there was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words, we 
shared them in common. we all hurried and took from our rooms the 
same things that we had when we entered the count's house. the 
professor had his ready, and as we met in the corridor he pointed to 
them significantly as he said, "they never leave me, and they shall 
not till this unhappy business is over. be wise also, my friends. it 
is no common enemy that we deal with alas! alas! that dear madam 
mina should suffer!" he stopped, his voice was breaking, and i do not 
know if rage or terror predominated in my own heart. 
outside the harkers' door we paused. art and quincey held back, and 
the latter said, "should we disturb her?" 
"we must," said van helsing grimly. "if the door be locked, i shall 
break it in." 
"may it not frighten her terribly? it is unusual to break into a 
lady's room!" 
van helsing said solemnly, "you are always right. but this is life 
and death. all chambers are alike to the doctor. and even were they 
not they are all as one to me tonight. friend john, when i turn the 
handle, if the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and 
shove; and you too, my friends. now!" 
he turned the handle as he spoke, but the door did not yield. we 
threw ourselves against it. with a crash it burst open, and we almost 
fell headlong into the room. the professor did actually fall, and i 
saw across him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees. what i 
saw appalled me. i felt my hair rise like bristles on the back of my 
neck, and my heart seemed to stand still. 
the moonlight was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the 
room was light enough to see. on the bed beside the window lay 
jonathan harker, his face flushed and breathing heavily as though in a 
stupor. kneeling on the near edge of the bed facing outwards was the 
white-clad figure of his wife. by her side stood a tall, thin man, 
clad in black. his face was turned from us, but the instant we saw we 
all recognized the count, in every way, even to the scar on his 
forehead. with his left hand he held both mrs. harker's hands, 
keeping them away with her arms at full tension. his right hand 
gripped her by the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his 
bosom. her white nightdress was smeared with blood, and a thin stream 
trickled down the man's bare chest which was shown by his torn-open 
dress. the attitude of the two had a terrible resemblance to a child 
forcing a kitten's nose into a saucer of milk to compel it to drink. 
as we burst into the room, the count turned his face, and the hellish 
look that i had heard described seemed to leap into it. his eyes 
flamed red with devilish passion. the great nostrils of the white 
aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge, and the white 
sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood dripping mouth, clamped 
together like those of a wild beast. with a wrench, which threw his 
victim back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned and 
sprang at us. but by this time the professor had gained his feet, and 
was holding towards him the envelope which contained the sacred wafer. 
the count suddenly stopped, just as poor lucy had done outside the 
tomb, and cowered back. further and further back he cowered, as we, 
lifting our crucifixes, advanced. the moonlight suddenly failed, as a 
great black cloud sailed across the sky. and when the gaslight sprang 
up under quincey's match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. this, as 
we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its 
bursting open, had swung back to its old position. van helsing, art, 
and i moved forward to mrs. harker, who by this time had drawn her 
breath and with it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so 
despairing that it seems to me now that it will ring in my ears till 
my dying day. for a few seconds she lay in her helpless attitude and 
disarray. her face was ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated 
by the blood which smeared her lips and cheeks and chin. from her 
throat trickled a thin stream of blood. her eyes were mad with 
terror. then she put before her face her poor crushed hands, which 
bore on their whiteness the red mark of the count's terrible grip, and 
from behind them came a low desolate wail which made the terrible 
scream seem only the quick expression of an endless grief. van 
helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently over her body, 
whilst art, after looking at her face for an instant despairingly, ran 
out of the room. 
van helsing whispered to me, "jonathan is in a stupor such as we know 
the vampire can produce. we can do nothing with poor madam mina for a 
few moments till she recovers herself. i must wake him!" 
he dipped the end of a towel in cold water and with it began to flick 
him on the face, his wife all the while holding her face between her 
hands and sobbing in a way that was heart breaking to hear. i raised 
the blind, and looked out of the window. there was much moonshine, 
and as i looked i could see quincey morris run across the lawn and 
hide himself in the shadow of a great yew tree. it puzzled me to 
think why he was doing this. but at the instant i heard harker's 
quick exclamation as he woke to partial consciousness, and turned to 
the bed. on his face, as there might well be, was a look of wild 
amazement. he seemed dazed for a few seconds, and then full 
consciousness seemed to burst upon him all at once, and he started up. 
his wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned to him with her 
arms stretched out, as though to embrace him. instantly, however, she 
drew them in again, and putting her elbows together, held her hands 
before her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook. 
"in god's name what does this mean?" harker cried out. "dr. seward, 
dr. van helsing, what is it? what has happened? what is wrong? mina, 
dear what is it? what does that blood mean? my god, my god! has it 
come to this!" and, raising himself to his knees, he beat his hands 
wildly together. "good god help us! help her! oh, help her!" 
with a quick movement he jumped from bed, and began to pull on his 
clothes, all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. 
"what has happened? tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. 
"dr. van helsing, you love mina, i know. oh, do something to save her. 
it cannot have gone too far yet. guard her while i look for him!" 
his wife, through her terror and horror and distress, saw some sure 
danger to him. instantly forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of 
him and cried out. 
"no! no! jonathan, you must not leave me. i have suffered enough 
tonight, god knows, without the dread of his harming you. you must 
stay with me. stay with these friends who will watch over you!" her 
expression became frantic as she spoke. and, he yielding to her, she 
pulled him down sitting on the bedside, and clung to him fiercely. 
van helsing and i tried to calm them both. the professor held up his 
golden crucifix, and said with wonderful calmness, "do not fear, my 
dear. we are here, and whilst this is close to you no foul thing can 
approach. you are safe for tonight, and we must be calm and take 
counsel together." 
she shuddered and was silent, holding down her head on her husband's 
breast. when she raised it, his white nightrobe was stained with 
blood where her lips had touched, and where the thin open wound in the 
neck had sent forth drops. the instant she saw it she drew back, with 
a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking sobs. 
"unclean, unclean! i must touch him or kiss him no more. oh, that it 
should be that it is i who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may 
have most cause to fear." 
to this he spoke out resolutely, "nonsense, mina. it is a shame to me 
to hear such a word. i would not hear it of you. and i shall not 
hear it from you. may god judge me by my deserts, and punish me with 
more bitter suffering than even this hour, if by any act or will of 
mine anything ever come between us!" 
he put out his arms and folded her to his breast. and for a while she 
lay there sobbing. he looked at us over her bowed head, with eyes 
that blinked damply above his quivering nostrils. his mouth was set 
as steel. 
after a while her sobs became less frequent and more faint, and then 
he said to me, speaking with a studied calmness which i felt tried his 
nervous power to the utmost. 
"and now, dr. seward, tell me all about it. too well i know the broad 
fact. tell me all that has been." 
i told him exactly what had happened and he listened with seeming 
impassiveness, but his nostrils twitched and his eyes blazed as i told 
how the ruthless hands of the count had held his wife in that terrible 
and horrid position, with her mouth to the open wound in his breast. 
it interested me, even at that moment, to see that whilst the face of 
white set passion worked convulsively over the bowed head, the hands 
tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled hair. just as i had 
finished, quincey and godalming knocked at the door. they entered in 
obedience to our summons. van helsing looked at me questioningly. i 
understood him to mean if we were to take advantage of their coming to 
divert if possible the thoughts of the unhappy husband and wife from 
each other and from themselves. so on nodding acquiescence to him he 
asked them what they had seen or done. to which lord godalming 
answered. 
"i could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any of our rooms. 
i looked in the study but, though he had been there, he had gone. he 
had, however . . ." he stopped suddenly, looking at the poor drooping 
figure on the bed. 
van helsing said gravely, "go on, friend arthur. we want here no more 
concealments. our hope now is in knowing all. tell freely!" 
so art went on, "he had been there, and though it could only have been 
for a few seconds, he made rare hay of the place. all the manuscript 
had been burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white 
ashes. the cylinders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, 
and the wax had helped the flames." 
here i interrupted. "thank god there is the other copy in the safe!" 
his face lit for a moment, but fell again as he went on. "i ran 
downstairs then, but could see no sign of him. i looked into 
renfield's room, but there was no trace there except . . ." again he 
paused. 
"go on," said harker hoarsely. so he bowed his head and moistening his 
lips with his tongue, added, "except that the poor fellow is dead." 
mrs. harker raised her head, looking from one to the other of us she 
said solemnly, "god's will be done!" 
i could not but feel that art was keeping back something. but, as i 
took it that it was with a purpose, i said nothing. 
van helsing turned to morris and asked, "and you, friend quincey, have 
you any to tell?" 
"a little," he answered. "it may be much eventually, but at present i 
can't say. i thought it well to know if possible where the count 
would go when he left the house. i did not see him, but i saw a bat 
rise from renfield's window, and flap westward. i expected to see him 
in some shape go back to carfax, but he evidently sought some other 
lair. he will not be back tonight, for the sky is reddening in the 
east, and the dawn is close. we must work tomorrow!" 
he said the latter words through his shut teeth. for a space of 
perhaps a couple of minutes there was silence, and i could fancy that 
i could hear the sound of our hearts beating. 
then van helsing said, placing his hand tenderly on mrs. harker's 
head, "and now, madam mina, poor dear, dear, madam mina, tell us 
exactly what happened. god knows that i do not want that you be 
pained, but it is need that we know all. for now more than ever has 
all work to be done quick and sharp, and in deadly earnest. the day 
is close to us that must end all, if it may be so, and now is the 
chance that we may live and learn." 
the poor dear lady shivered, and i could see the tension of her nerves 
as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her head lower and 
lower still on his breast. then she raised her head proudly, and held 
out one hand to van helsing who took it in his, and after stooping and 
kissing it reverently, held it fast. the other hand was locked in 
that of her husband, who held his other arm thrown round her 
protectingly. after a pause in which she was evidently ordering her 
thoughts, she began. 
"i took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but for 
a long time it did not act. i seemed to become more wakeful, and 
myriads of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon my mind. all of 
them connected with death, and vampires, with blood, and pain, and 
trouble." her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned to him and 
said lovingly, "do not fret, dear. you must be brave and strong, and 
help me through the horrible task. if you only knew what an effort it 
is to me to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand 
how much i need your help. well, i saw i must try to help the 
medicine to its work with my will, if it was to do me any good, so i 
resolutely set myself to sleep. sure enough sleep must soon have come 
to me, for i remember no more. jonathan coming in had not waked me, 
for he lay by my side when next i remember. there was in the room the 
same thin white mist that i had before noticed. but i forget now if 
you know of this. you will find it in my diary which i shall show you 
later. i felt the same vague terror which had come to me before and 
the same sense of some presence. i turned to wake jonathan, but found 
that he slept so soundly that it seemed as if it was he who had taken 
the sleeping draught, and not i. i tried, but i could not wake him. 
this caused me a great fear, and i looked around terrified. then 
indeed, my heart sank within me. beside the bed, as if he had stepped 
out of the mist, or rather as if the mist had turned into his figure, 
for it had entirely disappeared, stood a tall, thin man, all in 
black. i knew him at once from the description of the others. the 
waxen face, the high aquiline nose, on which the light fell in a thin 
white line, the parted red lips, with the sharp white teeth showing 
between, and the red eyes that i had seemed to see in the sunset on 
the windows of st. mary's church at whitby. i knew, too, the red scar 
on his forehead where jonathan had struck him. for an instant my 
heart stood still, and i would have screamed out, only that i was 
paralyzed. in the pause he spoke in a sort of keen, cutting whisper, 
pointing as he spoke to jonathan. 
"'silence! if you make a sound i shall take him and dash his brains 
out before your very eyes.' i was appalled and was too bewildered to 
do or say anything. with a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my 
shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying 
as he did so, 'first, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. 
you may as well be quiet. it is not the first time, or the second, 
that your veins have appeased my thirst!' i was bewildered, and 
strangely enough, i did not want to hinder him. i suppose it is a 
part of the horrible curse that such is, when his touch is on his 
victim. and oh, my god, my god, pity me! he placed his reeking lips 
upon my throat!" her husband groaned again. she clasped his hand 
harder, and looked at him pityingly, as if he were the injured one, 
and went on. 
"i felt my strength fading away, and i was in a half swoon. how long 
this horrible thing lasted i know not, but it seemed that a long time 
must have passed before he took his foul, awful, sneering mouth away. 
i saw it drip with the fresh blood!" the remembrance seemed for a while 
to overpower her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her 
husband's sustaining arm. with a great effort she recovered herself 
and went on. 
"then he spoke to me mockingly, 'and so you, like the others, would 
play your brains against mine. you would help these men to hunt me 
and frustrate me in my design! you know now, and they know in part 
already, and will know in full before long, what it is to cross my 
path. they should have kept their energies for use closer to home. 
whilst they played wits against me, against me who commanded nations, 
and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before 
they were born, i was countermining them. and you, their best beloved 
one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh, blood of my blood, kin of my 
kin, my bountiful wine-press for a while, and shall be later on my 
companion and my helper. you shall be avenged in turn, for not one of 
them but shall minister to your needs. but as yet you are to be 
punished for what you have done. you have aided in thwarting me. now 
you shall come to my call. when my brain says "come!" to you, you 
shall cross land or sea to do my bidding. and to that end this!' 
"with that he pulled open his shirt, and with his long sharp nails 
opened a vein in his breast. when the blood began to spurt out, he 
took my hands in one of his, holding them tight, and with the other 
seized my neck and pressed my mouth to the wound, so that i must 
either suffocate or swallow some to the . . . oh, my god! my god! 
what have i done? what have i done to deserve such a fate, i who have 
tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all my days. god pity 
me! look down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril. and in 
mercy pity those to whom she is dear!" then she began to rub her lips 
as though to cleanse them from pollution. 
as she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to 
quicken, and everything became more and more clear. harker was still 
and quiet; but over his face, as the awful narrative went on, came a 
grey look which deepened and deepened in the morning light, till when 
the first red streak of the coming dawn shot up, the flesh stood 
darkly out against the whitening hair. 
we have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy 
pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action. 
of this i am sure. the sun rises today on no more miserable house in 
all the great round of its daily course. 
chapter 22 
jonathan harker's journal 
3 october.-as i must do something or go mad, i write this diary. it 
is now six o'clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour 
and take something to eat, for dr. van helsing and dr. seward are 
agreed that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. our best will 
be, god knows, required today. i must keep writing at every chance, 
for i dare not stop to think. all, big and little, must go down. 
perhaps at the end the little things may teach us most. the teaching, 
big or little, could not have landed mina or me anywhere worse than we 
are today. however, we must trust and hope. poor mina told me just 
now, with the tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is in 
trouble and trial that our faith is tested. that we must keep on 
trusting, and that god will aid us up to the end. the end! oh my 
god! what end? . . . to work! to work! 
when dr. van helsing and dr. seward had come back from seeing poor 
renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. first, dr. seward 
told us that when he and dr. van helsing had gone down to the room 
below they had found renfield lying on the floor, all in a heap. his 
face was all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were 
broken. 
dr. seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he 
had heard anything. he said that he had been sitting down, he 
confessed to half dozing, when he heard loud voices in the room, and 
then renfield had called out loudly several times, "god! god! god!" 
after that there was a sound of falling, and when he entered the room 
he found him lying on the floor, face down, just as the doctors had 
seen him. van helsing asked if he had heard "voices" or "a voice," 
and he said he could not say. that at first it had seemed to him as 
if there were two, but as there was no one in the room it could have 
been only one. he could swear to it, if required, that the word "god" 
was spoken by the patient. 
dr. seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go 
into the matter. the question of an inquest had to be considered, and 
it would never do to put forward the truth, as no one would believe 
it. as it was, he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could 
give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. in 
case the coroner should demand it, there would be a formal inquest, 
necessarily to the same result. 
when the question began to be discussed as to what should be our next 
step, the very first thing we decided was that mina should be in full 
confidence. that nothing of any sort, no matter how painful, should 
be kept from her. she herself agreed as to its wisdom, and it was 
pitiful to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth 
of despair. 
"there must be no concealment," she said. "alas! we have had too 
much already. and besides there is nothing in all the world that can 
give me more pain than i have already endured, than i suffer now! 
whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!" 
van helsing was looking at her fixedly as she spoke, and said, 
suddenly but quietly, "but dear madam mina, are you not afraid. not 
for yourself, but for others from yourself, after what has happened?" 
her face grew set in its lines, but her eyes shone with the devotion 
of a martyr as she answered, "ah no! for my mind is made up!" 
"to what?" he asked gently, whilst we were all very still, for each in 
our own way we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant. 
her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she was simply 
stating a fact, "because if i find in myself, and i shall watch keenly 
for it, a sign of harm to any that i love, i shall die!" 
"you would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. 
"i would. if there were no friend who loved me, who would save me 
such a pain, and so desperate an effort!" she looked at him meaningly 
as she spoke. 
he was sitting down, but now he rose and came close to her and put his 
hand on her head as he said solemnly. "my child, there is such an one 
if it were for your good. for myself i could hold it in my account 
with god to find such an euthanasia for you, even at this moment if it 
were best. nay, were it safe! but my child . . ." 
for a moment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in his throat. he 
gulped it down and went on, "there are here some who would stand 
between you and death. you must not die. you must not die by any 
hand, but least of all your own. until the other, who has fouled your 
sweet life, is true dead you must not die. for if he is still with 
the quick undead, your death would make you even as he is. no, you 
must live! you must struggle and strive to live, though death would 
seem a boon unspeakable. you must fight death himself, though he come 
to you in pain or in joy. by the day, or the night, in safety or in 
peril! on your living soul i charge you that you do not die. nay, 
nor think of death, till this great evil be past." 
the poor dear grew white as death, and shook and shivered, as i have 
seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. we 
were all silent. we could do nothing. at length she grew more calm 
and turning to him said sweetly, but oh so sorrowfully, as she held 
out her hand, "i promise you, my dear friend, that if god will let me 
live, i shall strive to do so. till, if it may be in his good time, 
this horror may have passed away from me." 
she was so good and brave that we all felt that our hearts were 
strengthened to work and endure for her, and we began to discuss what 
we were to do. i told her that she was to have all the papers in the 
safe, and all the papers or diaries and phonographs we might hereafter 
use, and was to keep the record as she had done before. she was 
pleased with the prospect of anything to do, if "pleased" could be 
used in connection with so grim an interest. 
as usual van helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was 
prepared with an exact ordering of our work. 
"it is perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to 
carfax we decided not to do anything with the earth boxes that lay 
there. had we done so, the count must have guessed our purpose, and 
would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an 
effort with regard to the others. but now he does not know our 
intentions. nay, more, in all probability, he does not know that such 
a power exists to us as can sterilize his lairs, so that he cannot use 
them as of old. 
"we are now so much further advanced in our knowledge as to their 
disposition that, when we have examined the house in piccadilly, we may 
track the very last of them. today then, is ours, and in it rests our 
hope. the sun that rose on our sorrow this morning guards us in its 
course. until it sets tonight, that monster must retain whatever form 
he now has. he is confined within the limitations of his earthly 
envelope. he cannot melt into thin air nor disappear through cracks 
or chinks or crannies. if he go through a doorway, he must open the 
door like a mortal. and so we have this day to hunt out all his lairs 
and sterilize them. so we shall, if we have not yet catch him and 
destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catching and the 
destroying shall be, in time, sure." 
here i started up for i could not contain myself at the thought that 
the minutes and seconds so preciously laden with mina's life and 
happiness were flying from us, since whilst we talked action was 
impossible. but van helsing held up his hand warningly. 
"nay, friend jonathan," he said, "in this, the quickest way home is 
the longest way, so your proverb say. we shall all act and act with 
desperate quick, when the time has come. but think, in all probable 
the key of the situation is in that house in piccadilly. the count 
may have many houses which he has bought. of them he will have deeds 
of purchase, keys and other things. he will have paper that he write 
on. he will have his book of cheques. there are many belongings that 
he must have somewhere. why not in this place so central, so quiet, 
where he come and go by the front or the back at all hours, when in 
the very vast of the traffic there is none to notice. we shall go 
there and search that house. and when we learn what it holds, then we 
do what our friend arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the 
earths' and so we run down our old fox, so? is it not?" 
"then let us come at once," i cried, "we are wasting the precious, 
precious time!" 
the professor did not move, but simply said, "and how are we to get 
into that house in piccadilly?" 
"any way!" i cried. "we shall break in if need be." 
"and your police? where will they be, and what will they say?" 
i was staggered, but i knew that if he wished to delay he had a good 
reason for it. so i said, as quietly as i could, "don't wait more 
than need be. you know, i am sure, what torture i am in." 
"ah, my child, that i do. and indeed there is no wish of me to add to 
your anguish. but just think, what can we do, until all the world be 
at movement. then will come our time. i have thought and thought, 
and it seems to me that the simplest way is the best of all. now we 
wish to get into the house, but we have no key. is it not so?" i 
nodded. 
"now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and 
could not still get in. and think there was to you no conscience of 
the housebreaker, what would you do?" 
"i should get a respectable locksmith, and set him to work to pick the 
lock for me." 
"and your police, they would interfere, would they not?" 
"oh no! not if they knew the man was properly employed." 
"then," he looked at me as keenly as he spoke, "all that is in doubt 
is the conscience of the employer, and the belief of your policemen as 
to whether or not that employer has a good conscience or a bad one. 
your police must indeed be zealous men and clever, oh so clever, in 
reading the heart, that they trouble themselves in such matter. no, 
no, my friend jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty 
houses in this your london, or of any city in the world, and if you do 
it as such things are rightly done, and at the time such things are 
rightly done, no one will interfere. i have read of a gentleman who 
owned a so fine house in london, and when he went for months of summer 
to switzerland and lock up his house, some burglar come and broke 
window at back and got in. then he went and made open the shutters in 
front and walk out and in through the door, before the very eyes of 
the police. then he have an auction in that house, and advertise it, 
and put up big notice. and when the day come he sell off by a great 
auctioneer all the goods of that other man who own them. then he go 
to a builder, and he sell him that house, making an agreement that he 
pull it down and take all away within a certain time. and your police 
and other authority help him all they can. and when that owner come 
back from his holiday in switzerland he find only an empty hole where 
his house had been. this was all done en regle, and in our work we 
shall be en regle too. we shall not go so early that the policemen 
who have then little to think of, shall deem it strange. but we shall 
go after ten o'clock, when there are many about, and such things would 
be done were we indeed owners of the house." 
i could not but see how right he was and the terrible despair of 
mina's face became relaxed in thought. there was hope in such good 
counsel. 
van helsing went on, "when once within that house we may find more 
clues. at any rate some of us can remain there whilst the rest find 
the other places where there be more earth boxes, at bermondsey and 
mile end." 
lord godalming stood up. "i can be of some use here," he said. "i 
shall wire to my people to have horses and carriages where they will 
be most convenient." 
"look here, old fellow," said morris, "it is a capital idea to have 
all ready in case we want to go horse backing, but don't you think 
that one of your snappy carriages with its heraldic adornments in a 
byway of walworth or mile end would attract too much attention for our 
purpose? it seems to me that we ought to take cabs when we go south 
or east. and even leave them somewhere near the neighbourhood we are 
going to." 
"friend quincey is right!" said the professor. "his head is what you 
call in plane with the horizon. it is a difficult thing that we go to 
do, and we do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may." 
mina took a growing interest in everything and i was rejoiced to see 
that the exigency of affairs was helping her to forget for a time the 
terrible experience of the night. she was very, very pale, almost 
ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth 
in somewhat of prominence. i did not mention this last, lest it 
should give her needless pain, but it made my blood run cold in my 
veins to think of what had occurred with poor lucy when the count had 
sucked her blood. as yet there was no sign of the teeth growing 
sharper, but the time as yet was short, and there was time for fear. 
when we came to the discussion of the sequence of our efforts and of 
the disposition of our forces, there were new sources of doubt. it 
was finally agreed that before starting for piccadilly we should 
destroy the count's lair close at hand. in case he should find it out 
too soon, we should thus be still ahead of him in our work of 
destruction. and his presence in his purely material shape, and at 
his weakest, might give us some new clue. 
as to the disposal of forces, it was suggested by the professor that, 
after our visit to carfax, we should all enter the house in 
piccadilly. that the two doctors and i should remain there, whilst 
lord godalming and quincey found the lairs at walworth and mile end 
and destroyed them. it was possible, if not likely, the professor 
urged, that the count might appear in piccadilly during the day, and 
that if so we might be able to cope with him then and there. at any 
rate, we might be able to follow him in force. to this plan i 
strenuously objected, and so far as my going was concerned, for i said 
that i intended to stay and protect mina. i thought that my mind was 
made up on the subject, but mina would not listen to my objection. she 
said that there might be some law matter in which i could be useful. 
that amongst the count's papers might be some clue which i could 
understand out of my experience in transylvania. and that, as it was, 
all the strength we could muster was required to cope with the count's 
extraordinary power. i had to give in, for mina's resolution was 
fixed. she said that it was the last hope for her that we should all 
work together. 
"as for me," she said, "i have no fear. things have been as bad as 
they can be. and whatever may happen must have in it some element of 
hope or comfort. go, my husband! god can, if he wishes it, guard me 
as well alone as with any one present." 
so i started up crying out, "then in god's name let us come at once, 
for we are losing time. the count may come to piccadilly earlier than 
we think." 
"not so!" said van helsing, holding up his hand. 
"but why?" i asked. 
"do you forget," he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he 
banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?" 
did i forget! shall i ever . . . can i ever! can any of us ever 
forget that terrible scene! mina struggled hard to keep her brave 
countenance, but the pain overmastered her and she put her hands 
before her face, and shuddered whilst she moaned. van helsing had not 
intended to recall her frightful experience. he had simply lost sight 
of her and her part in the affair in his intellectual effort. 
when it struck him what he said, he was horrified at his 
thoughtlessness and tried to comfort her. 
"oh, madam mina," he said, "dear, dear, madam mina, alas! that i of 
all who so reverence you should have said anything so forgetful. these 
stupid old lips of mine and this stupid old head do not deserve so, 
but you will forget it, will you not?" he bent low beside her as he 
spoke. 
she took his hand, and looking at him through her tears, said 
hoarsely, "no, i shall not forget, for it is well that i remember. 
and with it i have so much in memory of you that is sweet, that i take 
it all together. now, you must all be going soon. breakfast is 
ready, and we must all eat that we may be strong." 
breakfast was a strange meal to us all. we tried to be cheerful and 
encourage each other, and mina was the brightest and most cheerful of 
us. when it was over, van helsing stood up and said, "now, my dear 
friends, we go forth to our terrible enterprise. are we all armed, as 
we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair. armed 
against ghostly as well as carnal attack?" 
we all assured him. 
"then it is well. now, madam mina, you are in any case quite safe 
here until the sunset. and before then we shall return . . . if . . . 
we shall return! but before we go let me see you armed against personal 
attack. i have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by 
the placing of things of which we know, so that he may not enter. now 
let me guard yourself. on your forehead i touch this piece of sacred 
wafer in the name of the father, the son, and . . ." 
there was a fearful scream which almost froze our hearts to hear. as 
he had placed the wafer on mina's forehead, it had seared it . . . had 
burned into the flesh as though it had been a piece of white-hot metal. 
my poor darling's brain had told her the significance of the fact as 
quickly as her nerves received the pain of it, and the two so 
overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in that 
dreadful scream. 
but the words to her thought came quickly. the echo of the scream had 
not ceased to ring on the air when there came the reaction, and she 
sank on her knees on the floor in an agony of abasement. pulling her 
beautiful hair over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she 
wailed out. 
"unclean! unclean! even the almighty shuns my polluted flesh! i 
must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the judgement 
day." 
they all paused. i had thrown myself beside her in an agony of 
helpless grief, and putting my arms around held her tight. for a few 
minutes our sorrowful hearts beat together, whilst the friends around 
us turned away their eyes that ran tears silently. then van helsing 
turned and said gravely. so gravely that i could not help feeling 
that he was in some way inspired, and was stating things outside 
himself. 
"it may be that you may have to bear that mark till god himself see 
fit, as he most surely shall, on the judgement day, to redress all 
wrongs of the earth and of his children that he has placed thereon. 
and oh, madam mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to 
see, when that red scar, the sign of god's knowledge of what has been, 
shall pass away, and leave your forehead as pure as the heart we know. 
for so surely as we live, that scar shall pass away when god sees 
right to lift the burden that is hard upon us. till then we bear our 
cross, as his son did in obedience to his will. it may be that we are 
chosen instruments of his good pleasure, and that we ascend to his 
bidding as that other through stripes and shame. through tears and 
blood. through doubts and fear, and all that makes the difference 
between god and man." 
there was hope in his words, and comfort. and they made for 
resignation. mina and i both felt so, and simultaneously we each took 
one of the old man's hands and bent over and kissed it. then without 
a word we all knelt down together, and all holding hands, swore to be 
true to each other. we men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of 
sorrow from the head of her whom, each in his own way, we loved. and 
we prayed for help and guidance in the terrible task which lay before 
us. it was then time to start. so i said farewell to mina, a parting 
which neither of us shall forget to our dying day, and we set out. 
to one thing i have made up my mind. if we find out that mina must be 
a vampire in the end, then she shall not go into that unknown and 
terrible land alone. i suppose it is thus that in old times one 
vampire meant many. just as their hideous bodies could only rest in 
sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for 
their ghastly ranks. 
we entered carfax without trouble and found all things the same as on 
the first occasion. it was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic 
surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any ground for 
such fear as already we knew. had not our minds been made up, and had 
there not been terrible memories to spur us on, we could hardly have 
proceeded with our task. we found no papers, or any sign of use in 
the house. and in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we 
had seen them last. 
dr. van helsing said to us solemnly as we stood before him, "and now, 
my friends, we have a duty here to do. we must sterilize this earth, 
so sacred of holy memories, that he has brought from a far distant 
land for such fell use. he has chosen this earth because it has been 
holy. thus we defeat him with his own weapon, for we make it more 
holy still. it was sanctified to such use of man, now we sanctify it 
to god." 
as he spoke he took from his bag a screwdriver and a wrench, and very 
soon the top of one of the cases was thrown open. the earth smelled 
musty and close, but we did not somehow seem to mind, for our 
attention was concentrated on the professor. taking from his box a 
piece of the sacred wafer he laid it reverently on the earth, and then 
shutting down the lid began to screw it home, we aiding him as he 
worked. 
one by one we treated in the same way each of the great boxes, and 
left them as we had found them to all appearance. but in each was a 
portion of the host. when we closed the door behind us, the professor 
said solemnly, "so much is already done. it may be that with all the 
others we can be so successful, then the sunset of this evening may 
shine of madam mina's forehead all white as ivory and with no stain!" 
as we passed across the lawn on our way to the station to catch our 
train we could see the front of the asylum. i looked eagerly, and in 
the window of my own room saw mina. i waved my hand to her, and 
nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. she 
nodded in reply to show that she understood. the last i saw, she was 
waving her hand in farewell. it was with a heavy heart that we sought 
the station and just caught the train, which was steaming in as we 
reached the platform. i have written this in the train. 
piccadilly, 12:30 o'clock.-just before we reached fenchurch street 
lord godalming said to me, "quincey and i will find a locksmith. you 
had better not come with us in case there should be any difficulty. 
for under the circumstances it wouldn't seem so bad for us to break 
into an empty house. but you are a solicitor and the incorporated law 
society might tell you that you should have known better." 
i demurred as to my not sharing any danger even of odium, but he went 
on, "besides, it will attract less attention if there are not too many 
of us. my title will make it all right with the locksmith, and with 
any policeman that may come along. you had better go with jack and 
the professor and stay in the green park. somewhere in sight of the 
house, and when you see the door opened and the smith has gone away, 
do you all come across. we shall be on the lookout for you, and shall 
let you in." 
"the advice is good!" said van helsing, so we said no more. godalming 
and morris hurried off in a cab, we following in another. at the 
corner of arlington street our contingent got out and strolled into 
the green park. my heart beat as i saw the house on which so much of 
our hope was centred, looming up grim and silent in its deserted 
condition amongst its more lively and spruce-looking neighbours. we 
sat down on a bench within good view, and began to smoke cigars so as 
to attract as little attention as possible. the minutes seemed to 
pass with leaden feet as we waited for the coming of the others. 
at length we saw a four-wheeler drive up. out of it, in leisurely 
fashion, got lord godalming and morris. and down from the box 
descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. 
morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. together 
the two ascended the steps, and lord godalming pointed out what he 
wanted done. the workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on 
one of the spikes of the rail, saying something to a policeman who 
just then sauntered along. the policeman nodded acquiescence, and the 
man kneeling down placed his bag beside him. after searching through 
it, he took out a selection of tools which he proceeded to lay beside 
him in orderly fashion. then he stood up, looked in the keyhole, blew 
into it, and turning to his employers, made some remark. lord 
godalming smiled, and the man lifted a good sized bunch of keys. 
selecting one of them, he began to probe the lock, as if feeling his 
way with it. after fumbling about for a bit he tried a second, and 
then a third. all at once the door opened under a slight push from 
him, and he and the two others entered the hall. we sat still. my 
own cigar burnt furiously, but van helsing's went cold altogether. we 
waited patiently as we saw the workman come out and bring his bag. 
then he held the door partly open, steadying it with his knees, whilst 
he fitted a key to the lock. this he finally handed to lord 
godalming, who took out his purse and gave him something. the man 
touched his hat, took his bag, put on his coat and departed. not a 
soul took the slightest notice of the whole transaction. 
when the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked 
at the door. it was immediately opened by quincey morris, beside whom 
stood lord godalming lighting a cigar. 
"the place smells so vilely," said the latter as we came in. it did 
indeed smell vilely. like the old chapel at carfax. and with our 
previous experience it was plain to us that the count had been using 
the place pretty freely. we moved to explore the house, all keeping 
together in case of attack, for we knew we had a strong and wily enemy 
to deal with, and as yet we did not know whether the count might not 
be in the house. 
in the dining room, which lay at the back of the hall, we found eight 
boxes of earth. eight boxes only out of the nine which we sought! 
our work was not over, and would never be until we should have found 
the missing box. 
first we opened the shutters of the window which looked out across a 
narrow stone flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to 
look like the front of a miniature house. there were no windows in 
it, so we were not afraid of being overlooked. we did not lose any 
time in examining the chests. with the tools which we had brought 
with us we opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had treated 
those others in the old chapel. it was evident to us that the count 
was not at present in the house, and we proceeded to search for any of 
his effects. 
after a cursory glance at the rest of the rooms, from basement to 
attic, we came to the conclusion that the dining room contained any 
effects which might belong to the count. and so we proceeded to 
minutely examine them. they lay in a sort of orderly disorder on the 
great dining room table. 
there were title deeds of the piccadilly house in a great bundle, 
deeds of the purchase of the houses at mile end and bermondsey, 
notepaper, envelopes, and pens and ink. all were covered up in thin 
wrapping paper to keep them from the dust. there were also a clothes 
brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin. the latter containing 
dirty water which was reddened as if with blood. last of all was a 
little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging 
to the other houses. 
when we had examined this last find, lord godalming and quincey morris 
taking accurate notes of the various addresses of the houses in the 
east and the south, took with them the keys in a great bunch, and set 
out to destroy the boxes in these places. the rest of us are, with 
what patience we can, waiting their return, or the coming of the 
count. 
chapter 23 
dr. seward's diary 
3 october.-the time seemed terribly long whilst we were waiting for 
the coming of godalming and quincey morris. the professor tried to 
keep our minds active by using them all the time. i could see his 
beneficent purpose, by the side glances which he threw from time to 
time at harker. the poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is 
appalling to see. last night he was a frank, happy-looking man, with 
strong, youthful face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. 
today he is a drawn, haggard old man, whose white hair matches well 
with the hollow burning eyes and grief-written lines of his face. his 
energy is still intact. in fact, he is like a living flame. this may 
yet be his salvation, for if all go well, it will tide him over the 
despairing period. he will then, in a kind of way, wake again to the 
realities of life. poor fellow, i thought my own trouble was bad 
enough, but his . . . ! 
the professor knows this well enough, and is doing his best to keep 
his mind active. what he has been saying was, under the 
circumstances, of absorbing interest. so well as i can remember, here 
it is: 
"i have studied, over and over again since they came into my hands, 
all the papers relating to this monster, and the more i have studied, 
the greater seems the necessity to utterly stamp him out. all through 
there are signs of his advance. not only of his power, but of his 
knowledge of it. as i learned from the researches of my friend 
arminius of buda-pesth, he was in life a most wonderful man. soldier, 
statesman, and alchemist-which latter was the highest development of 
the science knowledge of his time. he had a mighty brain, a learning 
beyond compare, and a heart that knew no fear and no remorse. he 
dared even to attend the scholomance, and there was no branch of 
knowledge of his time that he did not essay. 
"well, in him the brain powers survived the physical death. though it 
would seem that memory was not all complete. in some faculties of 
mind he has been, and is, only a child. but he is growing, and some 
things that were childish at the first are now of man's stature. he 
is experimenting, and doing it well. and if it had not been that we 
have crossed his path he would be yet, he may be yet if we fail, the 
father or furtherer of a new order of beings, whose road must lead 
through death, not life." 
harker groaned and said, "and this is all arrayed against my darling! 
but how is he experimenting? the knowledge may help us to defeat 
him!" 
"he has all along, since his coming, been trying his power, slowly but 
surely. that big child-brain of his is working. well for us, it is 
as yet a child-brain. for had he dared, at the first, to attempt 
certain things he would long ago have been beyond our power. however, 
he means to succeed, and a man who has centuries before him can afford 
to wait and to go slow. festina lente may well be his motto." 
"i fail to understand," said harker wearily. "oh, do be more plain to 
me! perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain." 
the professor laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke, "ah, 
my child, i will be plain. do you not see how, of late, this monster 
has been creeping into knowledge experimentally. how he has been 
making use of the zoophagous patient to effect his entry into friend 
john's home. for your vampire, though in all afterwards he can come 
when and how he will, must at the first make entry only when asked 
thereto by an inmate. but these are not his most important 
experiments. do we not see how at the first all these so great boxes 
were moved by others. he knew not then but that must be so. but all 
the time that so great child-brain of his was growing, and he began to 
consider whether he might not himself move the box. so he began to 
help. and then, when he found that this be all right, he try to move 
them all alone. and so he progress, and he scatter these graves of 
him. and none but he know where they are hidden. 
"he may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. so that only he 
use them in the night, or at such time as he can change his form, they 
do him equal well, and none may know these are his hiding place! but, 
my child, do not despair, this knowledge came to him just too late! 
already all of his lairs but one be sterilize as for him. and before 
the sunset this shall be so. then he have no place where he can move 
and hide. i delayed this morning that so we might be sure. is there 
not more at stake for us than for him? then why not be more careful 
than him? by my clock it is one hour and already, if all be well, 
friend arthur and quincey are on their way to us. today is our day, 
and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. see! there are 
five of us when those absent ones return." 
whilst we were speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door, 
the double postman's knock of the telegraph boy. we all moved out to 
the hall with one impulse, and van helsing, holding up his hand to us 
to keep silence, stepped to the door and opened it. the boy handed in 
a dispatch. the professor closed the door again, and after looking at 
the direction, opened it and read aloud. 
"look out for d. he has just now, 12:45, come from carfax 
hurriedly and hastened towards the south. he seems to be 
going the round and may want to see you: mina." 
there was a pause, broken by jonathan harker's voice, "now, god be 
thanked, we shall soon meet!" 
van helsing turned to him quickly and said, "god will act in his own 
way and time. do not fear, and do not rejoice as yet. for what we 
wish for at the moment may be our own undoings." 
"i care for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this 
brute from the face of creation. i would sell my soul to do it!" 
"oh, hush, hush, my child!" said van helsing. "god does not purchase 
souls in this wise, and the devil, though he may purchase, does not 
keep faith. but god is merciful and just, and knows your pain and 
your devotion to that dear madam mina. think you, how her pain would 
be doubled, did she but hear your wild words. do not fear any of us, 
we are all devoted to this cause, and today shall see the end. the 
time is coming for action. today this vampire is limit to the powers 
of man, and till sunset he may not change. it will take him time to 
arrive here, see it is twenty minutes past one, and there are yet some 
times before he can hither come, be he never so quick. what we must 
hope for is that my lord arthur and quincey arrive first." 
about half an hour after we had received mrs. harker's telegram, there 
came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall door. it was just an 
ordinary knock, such as is given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but 
it made the professor's heart and mine beat loudly. we looked at each 
other, and together moved out into the hall. we each held ready to 
use our various armaments, the spiritual in the left hand, the mortal 
in the right. van helsing pulled back the latch, and holding the door 
half open, stood back, having both hands ready for action. the 
gladness of our hearts must have shown upon our faces when on the 
step, close to the door, we saw lord godalming and quincey morris. 
they came quickly in and closed the door behind them, the former 
saying, as they moved along the hall: 
"it is all right. we found both places. six boxes in each and we 
destroyed them all." 
"destroyed?" asked the professor. 
"for him!" we were silent for a minute, and then quincey said, 
"there's nothing to do but to wait here. if, however, he doesn't turn 
up by five o'clock, we must start off. for it won't do to leave mrs. 
harker alone after sunset." 
"he will be here before long now," said van helsing, who had been 
consulting his pocketbook. "nota bene, in madam's telegram he went 
south from carfax. that means he went to cross the river, and he 
could only do so at slack of tide, which should be something before 
one o'clock. that he went south has a meaning for us. he is as yet 
only suspicious, and he went from carfax first to the place where he 
would suspect interference least. you must have been at bermondsey 
only a short time before him. that he is not here already shows that 
he went to mile end next. this took him some time, for he would then 
have to be carried over the river in some way. believe me, my 
friends, we shall not have long to wait now. we should have ready 
some plan of attack, so that we may throw away no chance. hush, there 
is no time now. have all your arms! be ready!" he held up a warning 
hand as he spoke, for we all could hear a key softly inserted in the 
lock of the hall door. 
i could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way in which a 
dominant spirit asserted itself. in all our hunting parties and 
adventures in different parts of the world, quincey morris had always 
been the one to arrange the plan of action, and arthur and i had been 
accustomed to obey him implicitly. now, the old habit seemed to be 
renewed instinctively. with a swift glance around the room, he at 
once laid out our plan of attack, and without speaking a word, with a 
gesture, placed us each in position. van helsing, harker, and i were 
just behind the door, so that when it was opened the professor could 
guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door. 
godalming behind and quincey in front stood just out of sight ready to 
move in front of the window. we waited in a suspense that made the 
seconds pass with nightmare slowness. the slow, careful steps came 
along the hall. the count was evidently prepared for some surprise, 
at least he feared it. 
suddenly with a single bound he leaped into the room. winning a way 
past us before any of us could raise a hand to stay him. there was 
something so pantherlike in the movement, something so unhuman, that 
it seemed to sober us all from the shock of his coming. the first to 
act was harker, who with a quick movement, threw himself before the 
door leading into the room in the front of the house. as the count 
saw us, a horrible sort of snarl passed over his face, showing the 
eyeteeth long and pointed. but the evil smile as quickly passed into 
a cold stare of lion-like disdain. his expression again changed as, 
with a single impulse, we all advanced upon him. it was a pity that 
we had not some better organized plan of attack, for even at the 
moment i wondered what we were to do. i did not myself know whether 
our lethal weapons would avail us anything. 
harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had ready his great 
kukri knife and made a fierce and sudden cut at him. the blow was a 
powerful one; only the diabolical quickness of the count's leap back 
saved him. a second less and the trenchant blade had shorn through 
his heart. as it was, the point just cut the cloth of his coat, 
making a wide gap whence a bundle of bank notes and a stream 
of gold fell out. the expression of the count's face was so hellish, 
that for a moment i feared for harker, though i saw him throw the 
terrible knife aloft again for another stroke. instinctively i moved 
forward with a protective impulse, holding the crucifix and wafer in 
my left hand. i felt a mighty power fly along my arm, and it was 
without surprise that i saw the monster cower back before a similar 
movement made spontaneously by each one of us. it would be impossible 
to describe the expression of hate and baffled malignity, of anger and 
hellish rage, which came over the count's face. his waxen hue became 
greenish-yellow by the contrast of his burning eyes, and the red scar 
on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. 
the next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under harker's arm, ere 
his blow could fall, and grasping a handful of the money from the 
floor, dashed across the room, threw himself at the window. amid the 
crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged 
area below. through the sound of the shivering glass i could hear the 
"ting" of the gold, as some of the sovereigns fell on the flagging. 
we ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. he, rushing up 
the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door. 
there he turned and spoke to us. 
"you think to baffle me, you with your pale faces all in a row, like 
sheep in a butcher's. you shall be sorry yet, each one of you! you 
think you have left me without a place to rest, but i have more. my 
revenge is just begun! i spread it over centuries, and time is on my 
side. your girls that you all love are mine already. and through 
them you and others shall yet be mine, my creatures, to do my bidding 
and to be my jackals when i want to feed. bah!" 
with a contemptuous sneer, he passed quickly through the door, and we 
heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. a door 
beyond opened and shut. the first of us to speak was the professor. 
realizing the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved 
toward the hall. 
"we have learnt something . . . much! notwithstanding his brave words, 
he fears us. he fears time, he fears want! for if not, why he hurry 
so? his very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. why take that 
money? you follow quick. you are hunters of the wild beast, and 
understand it so. for me, i make sure that nothing here may be of use 
to him, if so that he returns." 
as he spoke he put the money remaining in his pocket, took the title 
deeds in the bundle as harker had left them, and swept the remaining 
things into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with a 
match. 
godalming and morris had rushed out into the yard, and harker had 
lowered himself from the window to follow the count. he had, however, 
bolted the stable door, and by the time they had forced it open there 
was no sign of him. van helsing and i tried to make inquiry at the 
back of the house. but the mews was deserted and no one had seen him 
depart. 
it was now late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far off. we had 
to recognize that our game was up. with heavy hearts we agreed with 
the professor when he said, "let us go back to madam mina. poor, poor 
dear madam mina. all we can do just now is done, and we can there, at 
least, protect her. but we need not despair. there is but one more 
earth box, and we must try to find it. when that is done all may yet 
be well." 
i could see that he spoke as bravely as he could to comfort harker. 
the poor fellow was quite broken down, now and again he gave a low 
groan which he could not suppress. he was thinking of his wife. 
with sad hearts we came back to my house, where we found mrs. harker 
waiting us, with an appearance of cheerfulness which did honour to her 
bravery and unselfishness. when she saw our faces, her own became as 
pale as death. for a second or two her eyes were closed as if she 
were in secret prayer. 
and then she said cheerfully, "i can never thank you all enough. oh, 
my poor darling!" 
as she spoke, she took her husband's grey head in her hands and kissed 
it. 
"lay your poor head here and rest it. all will yet be well, dear! god 
will protect us if he so will it in his good intent." the poor fellow 
groaned. there was no place for words in his sublime misery. 
we had a sort of perfunctory supper together, and i think it cheered 
us all up somewhat. it was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to 
hungry people, for none of us had eaten anything since breakfast, or 
the sense of companionship may have helped us, but anyhow we were all 
less miserable, and saw the morrow as not altogether without hope. 
true to our promise, we told mrs. harker everything which had passed. 
and although she grew snowy white at times when danger had seemed to 
threaten her husband, and red at others when his devotion to her was 
manifested, she listened bravely and with calmness. when we came to 
the part where harker had rushed at the count so recklessly, she clung 
to her husband's arm, and held it tight as though her clinging could 
protect him from any harm that might come. she said nothing, however, 
till the narration was all done, and matters had been brought up to 
the present time. 
then without letting go her husband's hand she stood up amongst us and 
spoke. oh, that i could give any idea of the scene. of that sweet, 
sweet, good, good woman in all the radiant beauty of her youth and 
animation, with the red scar on her forehead, of which she was 
conscious, and which we saw with grinding of our teeth, remembering 
whence and how it came. her loving kindness against our grim hate. 
her tender faith against all our fears and doubting. and we, knowing 
that so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and purity and 
faith, was outcast from god. 
"jonathan," she said, and the word sounded like music on her lips it 
was so full of love and tenderness, "jonathan dear, and you all my 
true, true friends, i want you to bear something in mind through all 
this dreadful time. i know that you must fight. that you must 
destroy even as you destroyed the false lucy so that the true lucy 
might live hereafter. but it is not a work of hate. that poor soul 
who has wrought all this misery is the saddest case of all. just 
think what will be his joy when he, too, is destroyed in his worser 
part that his better part may have spiritual immortality. you must be 
pitiful to him, too, though it may not hold your hands from his 
destruction." 
as she spoke i could see her husband's face darken and draw together, 
as though the passion in him were shriveling his being to its core. 
instinctively the clasp on his wife's hand grew closer, till his 
knuckles looked white. she did not flinch from the pain which i knew 
she must have suffered, but looked at him with eyes that were more 
appealing than ever. 
as she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, almost tearing his hand 
from hers as he spoke. 
"may god give him into my hand just for long enough to destroy that 
earthly life of him which we are aiming at. if beyond it i could send 
his soul forever and ever to burning hell i would do it!" 
"oh, hush! oh, hush in the name of the good god. don't say such 
things, jonathan, my husband, or you will crush me with fear and 
horror. just think, my dear . . . i have been thinking all this long, 
long day of it . . . that . . . perhaps . . . some day . . . i, too, may 
need such pity, and that some other like you, and with equal cause for 
anger, may deny it to me! oh, my husband! my husband, indeed i would 
have spared you such a thought had there been another way. but i pray 
that god may not have treasured your wild words, except as the 
heart-broken wail of a very loving and sorely stricken man. oh, god, 
let these poor white hairs go in evidence of what he has suffered, who 
all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many sorrows have 
come." 
we men were all in tears now. there was no resisting them, and we 
wept openly. she wept, too, to see that her sweeter counsels had 
prevailed. her husband flung himself on his knees beside her, and 
putting his arms round her, hid his face in the folds of her dress. 
van helsing beckoned to us and we stole out of the room, leaving the 
two loving hearts alone with their god. 
before they retired the professor fixed up the room against any coming 
of the vampire, and assured mrs. harker that she might rest in peace. 
she tried to school herself to the belief, and manifestly for her 
husband's sake, tried to seem content. it was a brave struggle, and 
was, i think and believe, not without its reward. van helsing had 
placed at hand a bell which either of them was to sound in case of any 
emergency. when they had retired, quincey, godalming, and i arranged 
that we should sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over 
the safety of the poor stricken lady. the first watch falls to 
quincey, so the rest of us shall be off to bed as soon as we can. 
godalming has already turned in, for his is the second watch. now 
that my work is done i, too, shall go to bed. 
jonathan harker's journal 
3-4 october, close to midnight.-i thought yesterday would never end. 
there was over me a yearning for sleep, in some sort of blind belief 
that to wake would be to find things changed, and that any change must 
now be for the better. before we parted, we discussed what our next 
step was to be, but we could arrive at no result. all we knew was 
that one earth box remained, and that the count alone knew where it 
was. if he chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years. and in 
the meantime, the thought is too horrible, i dare not think of it even 
now. this i know, that if ever there was a woman who was all 
perfection, that one is my poor wronged darling. i loved her a 
thousand times more for her sweet pity of last night, a pity that made 
my own hate of the monster seem despicable. surely god will not 
permit the world to be the poorer by the loss of such a creature. this 
is hope to me. we are all drifting reefwards now, and faith is our 
only anchor. thank god! mina is sleeping, and sleeping without 
dreams. i fear what her dreams might be like, with such terrible 
memories to ground them in. she has not been so calm, within my 
seeing, since the sunset. then, for a while, there came over her face 
a repose which was like spring after the blasts of march. i thought 
at the time that it was the softness of the red sunset on her face, 
but somehow now i think it has a deeper meaning. i am not sleepy 
myself, though i am weary . . . weary to death. however, i must try 
to sleep. for there is tomorrow to think of, and there is no rest for 
me until . . . 
later-i must have fallen asleep, for i was awakened by mina, who was 
sitting up in bed, with a startled look on her face. i could see 
easily, for we did not leave the room in darkness. she had placed a 
warning hand over my mouth, and now she whispered in my ear, "hush! 
there is someone in the corridor!" i got up softly, and crossing the 
room, gently opened the door. 
just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay mr. morris, wide awake. he 
raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me, "hush! go 
back to bed. it is all right. one of us will be here all night. we 
don't mean to take any chances!" 
his look and gesture forbade discussion, so i came back and told mina. 
she sighed and positively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, 
pale face as she put her arms round me and said softly, "oh, thank god 
for good brave men!" with a sigh she sank back again to sleep. i 
write this now as i am not sleepy, though i must try again. 
4 october, morning.-once again during the night i was wakened by 
mina. this time we had all had a good sleep, for the grey of the 
coming dawn was making the windows into sharp oblongs, and the gas 
flame was like a speck rather than a disc of light. 
she said to me hurriedly, "go, call the professor. i want to see him 
at once." 
"why?" i asked. 
"i have an idea. i suppose it must have come in the night, and 
matured without my knowing it. he must hypnotize me before the dawn, 
and then i shall be able to speak. go quick, dearest, the time is 
getting close." 
i went to the door. dr. seward was resting on the mattress, and 
seeing me, he sprang to his feet. 
"is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm. 
"no," i replied. "but mina wants to see dr. van helsing at once." 
"i will go," he said, and hurried into the professor's room. 
two or three minutes later van helsing was in the room in his dressing 
gown, and mr. morris and lord godalming were with dr. seward at the 
door asking questions. when the professor saw mina a smile, a 
positive smile ousted the anxiety of his face. 
he rubbed his hands as he said, "oh, my dear madam mina, this is 
indeed a change. see! friend jonathan, we have got our dear madam 
mina, as of old, back to us today!" then turning to her, he said 
cheerfully, "and what am i to do for you? for at this hour you do not 
want me for nothing." 
"i want you to hypnotize me!" she said. "do it before the dawn, for i 
feel that then i can speak, and speak freely. be quick, for the time 
is short!" without a word he motioned her to sit up in bed. 
looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of her, 
from over the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. mina 
gazed at him fixedly for a few minutes, during which my own heart beat 
like a trip hammer, for i felt that some crisis was at hand. 
gradually her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still. only by the 
gentle heaving of her bosom could one know that she was alive. the 
professor made a few more passes and then stopped, and i could see 
that his forehead was covered with great beads of perspiration. mina 
opened her eyes, but she did not seem the same woman. there was a 
far-away look in her eyes, and her voice had a sad dreaminess which 
was new to me. raising his hand to impose silence, the professor 
motioned to me to bring the others in. they came on tiptoe, closing 
the door behind them, and stood at the foot of the bed, looking on. 
mina appeared not to see them. the stillness was broken by van 
helsing's voice speaking in a low level tone which would not break the 
current of her thoughts. 
"where are you?" the answer came in a neutral way. 
"i do not know. sleep has no place it can call its own." for several 
minutes there was silence. mina sat rigid, and the professor stood 
staring at her fixedly. 
the rest of us hardly dared to breathe. the room was growing lighter. 
without taking his eyes from mina's face, dr. van helsing motioned me 
to pull up the blind. i did so, and the day seemed just upon us. a 
red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to diffuse itself through 
the room. on the instant the professor spoke again. 
"where are you now?" 
the answer came dreamily, but with intention. it were as though she 
were interpreting something. i have heard her use the same tone when 
reading her shorthand notes. 
"i do not know. it is all strange to me!" 
"what do you see?" 
"i can see nothing. it is all dark." 
"what do you hear?" i could detect the strain in the professor's 
patient voice. 
"the lapping of water. it is gurgling by, and little waves leap. i 
can hear them on the outside." 
"then you are on a ship?'" 
we all looked at each other, trying to glean something each from the 
other. we were afraid to think. 
the answer came quick, "oh, yes!" 
"what else do you hear?" 
"the sound of men stamping overhead as they run about. there is the 
creaking of a chain, and the loud tinkle as the check of the capstan 
falls into the ratchet." 
"what are you doing?" 
"i am still, oh so still. it is like death!" the voice faded away 
into a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the open eyes closed again. 
by this time the sun had risen, and we were all in the full light of 
day. dr. van helsing placed his hands on mina's shoulders, and laid 
her head down softly on her pillow. she lay like a sleeping child for 
a few moments, and then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder 
to see us all around her. 
"have i been talking in my sleep?" was all she said. she seemed, 
however, to know the situation without telling, though she was eager 
to know what she had told. the professor repeated the conversation, 
and she said, "then there is not a moment to lose. it may not be yet 
too late!" 
mr. morris and lord godalming started for the door but the professor's 
calm voice called them back. 
"stay, my friends. that ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor at 
the moment in your so great port of london. which of them is it that 
you seek? god be thanked that we have once again a clue, though 
whither it may lead us we know not. we have been blind somewhat. 
blind after the manner of men, since we can look back we see what we 
might have seen looking forward if we had been able to see what we 
might have seen! alas, but that sentence is a puddle, is it not? we 
can know now what was in the count's mind, when he seize that money, 
though jonathan's so fierce knife put him in the danger that even he 
dread. he meant escape. hear me, escape! he saw that with but one 
earth box left, and a pack of men following like dogs after a fox, 
this london was no place for him. he have take his last earth box on 
board a ship, and he leave the land. he think to escape, but no! we 
follow him. tally ho! as friend arthur would say when he put on his 
red frock! our old fox is wily. oh! so wily, and we must follow 
with wile. i, too, am wily and i think his mind in a little while. 
in meantime we may rest and in peace, for there are between us which 
he do not want to pass, and which he could not if he would. unless 
the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or slack tide. 
see, and the sun is just rose, and all day to sunset is us. let us 
take bath, and dress, and have breakfast which we all need, and which 
we can eat comfortably since he be not in the same land with us." 
mina looked at him appealingly as she asked, "but why need we seek him 
further, when he is gone away from us?" 
he took her hand and patted it as he replied, "ask me nothing as yet. 
when we have breakfast, then i answer all questions." he would say no 
more, and we separated to dress. 
after breakfast mina repeated her question. he looked at her gravely 
for a minute and then said sorrowfully, "because my dear, dear madam 
mina, now more than ever must we find him even if we have to follow 
him to the jaws of hell!" 
she grew paler as she asked faintly, "why?" 
"because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you 
are but mortal woman. time is now to be dreaded, since once he put 
that mark upon your throat." 
i was just in time to catch her as she fell forward in a faint. 
chapter 24 
dr. seward's phonograph diary 
spoken by van helsing 
this to jonathan harker. 
you are to stay with your dear madam mina. we shall go to make our 
search, if i can call it so, for it is not search but knowing, and we 
seek confirmation only. but do you stay and take care of her today. 
this is your best and most holiest office. this day nothing can find 
him here. 
let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already, for i 
have tell them. he, our enemy, have gone away. he have gone back to 
his castle in transylvania. i know it so well, as if a great hand of 
fire wrote it on the wall. he have prepare for this in some way, and 
that last earth box was ready to ship somewheres. for this he took 
the money. for this he hurry at the last, lest we catch him before 
the sun go down. it was his last hope, save that he might hide in the 
tomb that he think poor miss lucy, being as he thought like him, keep 
open to him. but there was not of time. when that fail he make 
straight for his last resource, his last earth-work i might say did i 
wish double entente. he is clever, oh so clever! he know that his 
game here was finish. and so he decide he go back home. he find ship 
going by the route he came, and he go in it. 
we go off now to find what ship, and whither bound. when we have 
discover that, we come back and tell you all. then we will comfort 
you and poor madam mina with new hope. for it will be hope when you 
think it over, that all is not lost. this very creature that we 
pursue, he take hundreds of years to get so far as london. and yet in 
one day, when we know of the disposal of him we drive him out. he is 
finite, though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we 
do. but we are strong, each in our purpose, and we are all more 
strong together. take heart afresh, dear husband of madam mina. this 
battle is but begun and in the end we shall win. so sure as that god 
sits on high to watch over his children. therefore be of much comfort 
till we return. 
van helsing. 
jonathan harker's journal 
4 october.-when i read to mina, van helsing's message in the 
phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. already the 
certainty that the count is out of the country has given her comfort. 
and comfort is strength to her. for my own part, now that his 
horrible danger is not face to face with us, it seems almost 
impossible to believe in it. even my own terrible experiences in 
castle dracula seem like a long forgotten dream. here in the crisp 
autumn air in the bright sunlight. 
alas! how can i disbelieve! in the midst of my thought my eye fell 
on the red scar on my poor darling's white forehead. whilst that 
lasts, there can be no disbelief. mina and i fear to be idle, so we 
have been over all the diaries again and again. somehow, although the 
reality seem greater each time, the pain and the fear seem less. there 
is something of a guiding purpose manifest throughout, which is 
comforting. mina says that perhaps we are the instruments of ultimate 
good. it may be! i shall try to think as she does. we have never 
spoken to each other yet of the future. it is better to wait till we 
see the professor and the others after their investigations. 
the day is running by more quickly than i ever thought a day could run 
for me again. it is now three o'clock. 
mina harker's journal 
5 october, 5 p.m.-our meeting for report. present: professor van 
helsing, lord godalming, dr. seward, mr. quincey morris, jonathan 
harker, mina harker. 
dr. van helsing described what steps were taken during the day to 
discover on what boat and whither bound count dracula made his escape. 
"as i knew that he wanted to get back to transylvania, i felt sure 
that he must go by the danube mouth, or by somewhere in the black sea, 
since by that way he come. it was a dreary blank that was before us. 
omme ignotum pro magnifico, and so with heavy hearts we start to find 
what ships leave for the black sea last night. he was in sailing 
ship, since madam mina tell of sails being set. these not so 
important as to go in your list of the shipping in the times, and so 
we go, by suggestion of lord godalming, to your lloyd's, where are 
note of all ships that sail, however so small. there we find that 
only one black sea bound ship go out with the tide. she is the 
czarina catherine, and she sail from doolittle's wharf for varna, and 
thence to other ports and up the danube. 'so!' said i, 'this is the 
ship whereon is the count.' so off we go to doolittle's wharf, and 
there we find a man in an office. from him we inquire of the goings 
of the czarina catherine. he swear much, and he red face and loud of 
voice, but he good fellow all the same. and when quincey give him 
something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and put it 
in a so small bag which he have hid deep in his clothing, he still 
better fellow and humble servant to us. he come with us, and ask many 
men who are rough and hot. these be better fellows too when they have 
been no more thirsty. they say much of blood and bloom, and of others 
which i comprehend not, though i guess what they mean. but 
nevertheless they tell us all things which we want to know. 
"they make known to us among them, how last afternoon at about five 
o'clock comes a man so hurry. a tall man, thin and pale, with high 
nose and teeth so white, and eyes that seem to be burning. that he be 
all in black, except that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or 
the time. that he scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to 
what ship sails for the black sea and for where. some took him to the 
office and then to the ship, where he will not go aboard but halt at 
shore end of gangplank, and ask that the captain come to him. the 
captain come, when told that he will be pay well, and though he swear 
much at the first he agree to term. then the thin man go and some one 
tell him where horse and cart can be hired. he go there and soon he 
come again, himself driving cart on which a great box. this he 
himself lift down, though it take several to put it on truck for the 
ship. he give much talk to captain as to how and where his box is to 
be place. but the captain like it not and swear at him in many 
tongues, and tell him that if he like he can come and see where it 
shall be. but he say 'no,' that he come not yet, for that he have 
much to do. whereupon the captain tell him that he had better be 
quick, with blood, for that his ship will leave the place, of blood, 
before the turn of the tide, with blood. then the thin man smile and 
say that of course he must go when he think fit, but he will be 
surprise if he go quite so soon. the captain swear again, polyglot, 
and the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he will so 
far intrude on his kindness as to come aboard before the sailing. 
final the captain, more red than ever, and in more tongues, tell him 
that he doesn't want no frenchmen, with bloom upon them and also with 
blood, in his ship, with blood on her also. and so, after asking 
where he might purchase ship forms, he departed. 
"no one knew where he went 'or bloomin' well cared' as they said, for 
they had something else to think of, well with blood again. for it 
soon became apparent to all that the czarina catherine would not sail 
as was expected. a thin mist began to creep up from the river, and it 
grew, and grew. till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and all 
around her. the captain swore polyglot, very polyglot, polyglot with 
bloom and blood, but he could do nothing. the water rose and rose, 
and he began to fear that he would lose the tide altogether. he was 
in no friendly mood, when just at full tide, the thin man came up the 
gangplank again and asked to see where his box had been stowed. then 
the captain replied that he wished that he and his box, old and with 
much bloom and blood, were in hell. but the thin man did not be 
offend, and went down with the mate and saw where it was place, and 
came up and stood awhile on deck in fog. he must have come off by 
himself, for none notice him. indeed they thought not of him, for 
soon the fog begin to melt away, and all was clear again. my friends 
of the thirst and the language that was of bloom and blood laughed, as 
they told how the captain's swears exceeded even his usual polyglot, 
and was more than ever full of picturesque, when on questioning other 
mariners who were on movement up and down the river that hour, he 
found that few of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay 
round the wharf. however, the ship went out on the ebb tide, and was 
doubtless by morning far down the river mouth. she was then, when 
they told us, well out to sea. 
"and so, my dear madam mina, it is that we have to rest for a time, 
for our enemy is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way 
to the danube mouth. to sail a ship takes time, go she never so 
quick. and when we start to go on land more quick, and we meet him 
there. our best hope is to come on him when in the box between 
sunrise and sunset. for then he can make no struggle, and we may deal 
with him as we should. there are days for us, in which we can make 
ready our plan. we know all about where he go. for we have seen the 
owner of the ship, who have shown us invoices and all papers that can 
be. the box we seek is to be landed in varna, and to be given to an 
agent, one ristics who will there present his credentials. and so our 
merchant friend will have done his part. when he ask if there be any 
wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and have inquiry made at varna, 
we say 'no,' for what is to be done is not for police or of the 
customs. it must be done by us alone and in our own way." 
when dr. van helsing had done speaking, i asked him if he were certain 
that the count had remained on board the ship. he replied, "we have 
the best proof of that, your own evidence, when in the hypnotic trance 
this morning." 
i asked him again if it were really necessary that they should pursue 
the count, for oh! i dread jonathan leaving me, and i know that he 
would surely go if the others went. he answered in growing passion, 
at first quietly. as he went on, however, he grew more angry and more 
forceful, till in the end we could not but see wherein was at least 
some of that personal dominance which made him so long a master 
amongst men. 
"yes, it is necessary, necessary, necessary! for your sake in the 
first, and then for the sake of humanity. this monster has done much 
harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the 
short time when as yet he was only as a body groping his so small 
measure in darkness and not knowing. all this have i told these 
others. you, my dear madam mina, will learn it in the phonograph of 
my friend john, or in that of your husband. i have told them how the 
measure of leaving his own barren land, barren of peoples, and coming 
to a new land where life of man teems till they are like the multitude 
of standing corn, was the work of centuries. were another of the 
undead, like him, to try to do what he has done, perhaps not all the 
centuries of the world that have been, or that will be, could aid him. 
with this one, all the forces of nature that are occult and deep and 
strong must have worked together in some wonderous way. the very 
place, where he have been alive, undead for all these centuries, is 
full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. there are 
deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. there have 
been volcanoes, some of whose openings still send out waters of 
strange properties, and gases that kill or make to vivify. doubtless, 
there is something magnetic or electric in some of these combinations 
of occult forces which work for physical life in strange way, and in 
himself were from the first some great qualities. in a hard and 
warlike time he was celebrate that he have more iron nerve, more 
subtle brain, more braver heart, than any man. in him some vital 
principle have in strange way found their utmost. and as his body 
keep strong and grow and thrive, so his brain grow too. all this 
without that diabolic aid which is surely to him. for it have to 
yield to the powers that come from, and are, symbolic of good. and 
now this is what he is to us. he have infect you, oh forgive me, my 
dear, that i must say such, but it is for good of you that i speak. he 
infect you in such wise, that even if he do no more, you have only to 
live, to live in your own old, sweet way, and so in time, death, which 
is of man's common lot and with god's sanction, shall make you like to 
him. this must not be! we have sworn together that it must not. 
thus are we ministers of god's own wish. that the world, and men for 
whom his son die, will not be given over to monsters, whose very 
existence would defame him. he have allowed us to redeem one soul 
already, and we go out as the old knights of the cross to redeem 
more. like them we shall travel towards the sunrise. and like them, 
if we fall, we fall in good cause." 
he paused and i said, "but will not the count take his rebuff wisely? 
since he has been driven from england, will he not avoid it, as a 
tiger does the village from which he has been hunted?" 
"aha!" he said, "your simile of the tiger good, for me, and i shall 
adopt him. your maneater, as they of india call the tiger who has 
once tasted blood of the human, care no more for the other prey, but 
prowl unceasing till he get him. this that we hunt from our village 
is a tiger, too, a maneater, and he never cease to prowl. nay, in 
himself he is not one to retire and stay afar. in his life, his 
living life, he go over the turkey frontier and attack his enemy on 
his own ground. he be beaten back, but did he stay? no! he come 
again, and again, and again. look at his persistence and endurance. 
with the child-brain that was to him he have long since conceive the 
idea of coming to a great city. what does he do? he find out the 
place of all the world most of promise for him. then he deliberately 
set himself down to prepare for the task. he find in patience just 
how is his strength, and what are his powers. he study new tongues. 
he learn new social life, new environment of old ways, the politics, 
the law, the finance, the science, the habit of a new land and a new 
people who have come to be since he was. his glimpse that he have 
had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. nay, it help him 
to grow as to his brain. for it all prove to him how right he was at 
the first in his surmises. he have done this alone, all alone! from 
a ruin tomb in a forgotten land. what more may he not do when the 
greater world of thought is open to him. he that can smile at death, 
as we know him. who can flourish in the midst of diseases that kill 
off whole peoples. oh! if such an one was to come from god, and not 
the devil, what a force for good might he not be in this old world of 
ours. but we are pledged to set the world free. our toil must be in 
silence, and our efforts all in secret. for in this enlightened age, 
when men believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men 
would be his greatest strength. it would be at once his sheath and 
his armor, and his weapons to destroy us, his enemies, who are willing 
to peril even our own souls for the safety of one we love. for the 
good of mankind, and for the honour and glory of god." 
after a general discussion it was determined that for tonight nothing 
be definitely settled. that we should all sleep on the facts, and try 
to think out the proper conclusions. tomorrow, at breakfast, we are 
to meet again, and after making our conclusions known to one another, 
we shall decide on some definite cause of action . . . 
i feel a wonderful peace and rest tonight. it is as if some haunting 
presence were removed from me. perhaps . . . 
my surmise was not finished, could not be, for i caught sight in the 
mirror of the red mark upon my forehead, and i knew that i was still 
unclean. 
dr. seward's diary 
5 october.-we all arose early, and i think that sleep did much for 
each and all of us. when we met at early breakfast there was more 
general cheerfulness than any of us had ever expected to experience 
again. 
it is really wonderful how much resilience there is in human nature. 
let any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way, even 
by death, and we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment. 
more than once as we sat around the table, my eyes opened in wonder 
whether the whole of the past days had not been a dream. it was only 
when i caught sight of the red blotch on mrs. harker's forehead that i 
was brought back to reality. even now, when i am gravely revolving 
the matter, it is almost impossible to realize that the cause of all 
our trouble is still existent. even mrs. harker seems to lose sight 
of her trouble for whole spells. it is only now and again, when 
something recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible 
scar. we are to meet here in my study in half an hour and decide on 
our course of action. i see only one immediate difficulty, i know it 
by instinct rather than reason. we shall all have to speak frankly. 
and yet i fear that in some mysterious way poor mrs. harker's tongue 
is tied. i know that she forms conclusions of her own, and from all 
that has been i can guess how brilliant and how true they must be. 
but she will not, or cannot, give them utterance. i have mentioned 
this to van helsing, and he and i are to talk it over when we are 
alone. i suppose it is some of that horrid poison which has got into 
her veins beginning to work. the count had his own purposes when he 
gave her what van helsing called "the vampire's baptism of blood." 
well, there may be a poison that distills itself out of good things. 
in an age when the existence of ptomaines is a mystery we should not 
wonder at anything! one thing i know, that if my instinct be true 
regarding poor mrs. harker's silences, then there is a terrible 
difficulty, an unknown danger, in the work before us. the same power 
that compels her silence may compel her speech. i dare not think 
further, for so i should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman! 
later.-when the professor came in, we talked over the state of 
things. i could see that he had something on his mind, which he 
wanted to say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching the subject. 
after beating about the bush a little, he said, "friend john, there is 
something that you and i must talk of alone, just at the first at any 
rate. later, we may have to take the others into our confidence." 
then he stopped, so i waited. he went on, "madam mina, our poor, dear 
madam mina is changing." 
a cold shiver ran through me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. 
van helsing continued. 
"with the sad experience of miss lucy, we must this time be warned 
before things go too far. our task is now in reality more difficult 
than ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst 
importance. i can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in 
her face. it is now but very, very slight. but it is to be seen if 
we have eyes to notice without prejudge. her teeth are sharper, and 
at times her eyes are more hard. but these are not all, there is to 
her the silence now often, as so it was with miss lucy. she did not 
speak, even when she wrote that which she wished to be known later. 
now my fear is this. if it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, 
tell what the count see and hear, is it not more true that he who have 
hypnotize her first, and who have drink of her very blood and make her 
drink of his, should if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him 
that which she know?" 
i nodded acquiescence. he went on, "then, what we must do is to 
prevent this. we must keep her ignorant of our intent, and so she 
cannot tell what she know not. this is a painful task! oh, so 
painful that it heartbreak me to think of it, but it must be. when 
today we meet, i must tell her that for reason which we will not to 
speak she must not more be of our council, but be simply guarded by 
us." 
he wiped his forehead, which had broken out in profuse perspiration at 
the thought of the pain which he might have to inflict upon the poor 
soul already so tortured. i knew that it would be some sort of 
comfort to him if i told him that i also had come to the same 
conclusion. for at any rate it would take away the pain of doubt. i 
told him, and the effect was as i expected. 
it is now close to the time of our general gathering. van helsing has 
gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. i 
really believe his purpose is to be able to pray alone. 
later.-at the very outset of our meeting a great personal relief was 
experienced by both van helsing and myself. mrs. harker had sent a 
message by her husband to say that she would not join us at present, 
as she thought it better that we should be free to discuss our 
movements without her presence to embarrass us. the professor and i 
looked at each other for an instant, and somehow we both seemed 
relieved. for my own part, i thought that if mrs. harker realized the 
danger herself, it was much pain as well as much danger averted. 
under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, 
with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we 
should have been able to confer alone again. we went at once into our 
plan of campaign. 
van helsing roughly put the facts before us first, "the czarina 
catherine left the thames yesterday morning. it will take her at the 
quickest speed she has ever made at least three weeks to reach varna. 
but we can travel overland to the same place in three days. now, if 
we allow for two days less for the ship's voyage, owing to such 
weather influences as we know that the count can bring to bear, and if 
we allow a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us, 
then we have a margin of nearly two weeks. 
"thus, in order to be quite safe, we must leave here on 17th at 
latest. then we shall at any rate be in varna a day before the ship 
arrives, and able to make such preparations as may be necessary. of 
course we shall all go armed, armed against evil things, spiritual as 
well as physical." 
here quincey morris added, "i understand that the count comes from a 
wolf country, and it may be that he shall get there before us. i 
propose that we add winchesters to our armament. i have a kind of 
belief in a winchester when there is any trouble of that sort around. 
do you remember, art, when we had the pack after us at tobolsk? what 
wouldn't we have given then for a repeater apiece!" 
"good!" said van helsing, "winchesters it shall be. quincey's head is 
level at times, but most so when there is to hunt, metaphor be more 
dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. in the meantime 
we can do nothing here. and as i think that varna is not familiar to 
any of us, why not go there more soon? it is as long to wait here as 
there. tonight and tomorrow we can get ready, and then if all be 
well, we four can set out on our journey." 
"we four?" said harker interrogatively, looking from one to another of 
us. 
"of course!" answered the professor quickly. "you must remain to take 
care of your so sweet wife!" 
harker was silent for awhile and then said in a hollow voice, "let us 
talk of that part of it in the morning. i want to consult with mina." 
i thought that now was the time for van helsing to warn him not to 
disclose our plan to her, but he took no notice. i looked at him 
significantly and coughed. for answer he put his finger to his lips 
and turned away. 
jonathan harker's journal 
5 october, afternoon.-for some time after our meeting this morning i 
could not think. the new phases of things leave my mind in a state of 
wonder which allows no room for active thought. mina's determination 
not to take any part in the discussion set me thinking. and as i 
could not argue the matter with her, i could only guess. i am as far 
as ever from a solution now. the way the others received it, too 
puzzled me. the last time we talked of the subject we agreed that 
there was to be no more concealment of anything amongst us. mina is 
sleeping now, calmly and sweetly like a little child. her lips are 
curved and her face beams with happiness. thank god, there are such 
moments still for her. 
later.-how strange it all is. i sat watching mina's happy sleep, and 
i came as near to being happy myself as i suppose i shall ever be. as 
the evening drew on, and the earth took its shadows from the sun 
sinking lower, the silence of the room grew more and more solemn to 
me. 
all at once mina opened her eyes, and looking at me tenderly said, 
"jonathan, i want you to promise me something on your word of honour. 
a promise made to me, but made holily in god's hearing, and not to be 
broken though i should go down on my knees and implore you with bitter 
tears. quick, you must make it to me at once." 
"mina," i said, "a promise like that, i cannot make at once. i may 
have no right to make it." 
"but, dear one," she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes 
were like pole stars, "it is i who wish it. and it is not for myself. 
you can ask dr. van helsing if i am not right. if he disagrees you 
may do as you will. nay, more if you all agree, later you are 
absolved from the promise." 
"i promise!" i said, and for a moment she looked supremely happy. 
though to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her 
forehead. 
she said, "promise me that you will not tell me anything of the plans 
formed for the campaign against the count. not by word, or inference, 
or implication, not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she 
solemnly pointed to the scar. i saw that she was in earnest, and said 
solemnly, "i promise!" and as i said it i felt that from that instant 
a door had been shut between us. 
later, midnight.-mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. 
so much so that all the rest seemed to take courage, as if infected 
somewhat with her gaiety. as a result even i myself felt as if the 
pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. we all 
retired early. mina is now sleeping like a little child. it is 
wonderful thing that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the midst 
of her terrible trouble. thank god for it, for then at least she can 
forget her care. perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did 
tonight. i shall try it. oh! for a dreamless sleep. 
6 october, morning.-another surprise. mina woke me early, about the 
same time as yesterday, and asked me to bring dr. van helsing. i 
thought that it was another occasion for hypnotism, and without 
question went for the professor. he had evidently expected some such 
call, for i found him dressed in his room. his door was ajar, so that 
he could hear the opening of the door of our room. he came at once. 
as he passed into the room, he asked mina if the others might come, 
too. 
"no," she said quite simply, "it will not be necessary. you can tell 
them just as well. i must go with you on your journey." 
dr. van helsing was as startled as i was. after a moment's pause he 
asked, "but why?" 
"you must take me with you. i am safer with you, and you shall be 
safer, too." 
"but why, dear madam mina? you know that your safety is our solemnest 
duty. we go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable 
than any of us from . . . from circumstances . . . things that have 
been." he paused embarrassed. 
as she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead. "i 
know. that is why i must go. i can tell you now, whilst the sun is 
coming up. i may not be able again. i know that when the count wills 
me i must go. i know that if he tells me to come in secret, i must by 
wile. by any device to hoodwink, even jonathan." god saw the look 
that she turned on me as she spoke, and if there be indeed a recording 
angel that look is noted to her ever-lasting honour. i could only 
clasp her hand. i could not speak. my emotion was too great for even 
the relief of tears. 
she went on. "you men are brave and strong. you are strong in your 
numbers, for you can defy that which would break down the human 
endurance of one who had to guard alone. besides, i may be of 
service, since you can hypnotize me and so learn that which even i 
myself do not know." 
dr. van helsing said gravely, "madam mina, you are, as always, most 
wise. you shall with us come. and together we shall do that which we 
go forth to achieve." 
when he had spoken, mina's long spell of silence made me look at her. 
she had fallen back on her pillow asleep. she did not even wake when 
i had pulled up the blind and let in the sunlight which flooded the 
room. van helsing motioned to me to come with him quietly. we went 
to his room, and within a minute lord godalming, dr. seward, and mr. 
morris were with us also. 
he told them what mina had said, and went on. "in the morning we 
shall leave for varna. we have now to deal with a new factor, madam 
mina. oh, but her soul is true. it is to her an agony to tell us so 
much as she has done. but it is most right, and we are warned in 
time. there must be no chance lost, and in varna we must be ready to 
act the instant when that ship arrives." 
"what shall we do exactly?" asked mr. morris laconically. 
the professor paused before replying, "we shall at the first board 
that ship. then, when we have identified the box, we shall place a 
branch of the wild rose on it. this we shall fasten, for when it is 
there none can emerge, so that at least says the superstition. and to 
superstition must we trust at the first. it was man's faith in the 
early, and it have its root in faith still. then, when we get the 
opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the 
box, and . . . and all will be well." 
"i shall not wait for any opportunity," said morris. "when i see the 
box i shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a 
thousand men looking on, and if i am to be wiped out for it the next 
moment!" i grasped his hand instinctively and found it as firm as a 
piece of steel. i think he understood my look. i hope he did. 
"good boy," said dr. van helsing. "brave boy. quincey is all man. 
god bless him for it. my child, believe me none of us shall lag 
behind or pause from any fear. i do but say what we may do . . . what 
we must do. but, indeed, indeed we cannot say what we may do. there 
are so many things which may happen, and their ways and their ends are 
so various that until the moment we may not say. we shall all be 
armed, in all ways. and when the time for the end has come, our 
effort shall not be lack. now let us today put all our affairs in 
order. let all things which touch on others dear to us, and who on us 
depend, be complete. for none of us can tell what, or when, or how, 
the end may be. as for me, my own affairs are regulate, and as i have 
nothing else to do, i shall go make arrangements for the travel. i 
shall have all tickets and so forth for our journey." 
there was nothing further to be said, and we parted. i shall now 
settle up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for whatever may come. 
later.-it is done. my will is made, and all complete. mina if she 
survive is my sole heir. if it should not be so, then the others who 
have been so good to us shall have remainder. 
it is now drawing towards the sunset. mina's uneasiness calls my 
attention to it. i am sure that there is something on her mind which 
the time of exact sunset will reveal. these occasions are becoming 
harrowing times for us all. for each sunrise and sunset opens up some 
new danger, some new pain, which however, may in god's will be means 
to a good end. i write all these things in the diary since my darling 
must not hear them now. but if it may be that she can see them again, 
they shall be ready. she is calling to me. 
chapter 25 
dr seward's diary 
11 october, evening.-jonathan harker has asked me to note this, as he 
says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record 
kept. 
i think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see mrs. 
harker a little before the time of sunset. we have of late come to 
understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar 
freedom. when her old self can be manifest without any controlling 
force subduing or restraining her, or inciting her to action. this 
mood or condition begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise 
or sunset, and lasts till either the sun is high, or whilst the clouds 
are still aglow with the rays streaming above the horizon. at first 
there is a sort of negative condition, as if some tie were loosened, 
and then the absolute freedom quickly follows. when, however, the 
freedom ceases the change back or relapse comes quickly, preceded 
only by a spell of warning silence. 
tonight, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the 
signs of an internal struggle. i put it down myself to her making a 
violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so. 
a very few minutes, however, gave her complete control of herself. 
then, motioning her husband to sit beside her on the sofa where she 
was half reclining, she made the rest of us bring chairs up close. 
taking her husband's hand in hers, she began, "we are all here 
together in freedom, for perhaps the last time! i know that you will 
always be with me to the end." this was to her husband whose hand had, 
as we could see, tightened upon her. "in the morning we go out upon 
our task, and god alone knows what may be in store for any of us. you 
are going to be so good to me to take me with you. i know that all 
that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak woman, whose soul 
perhaps is lost, no, no, not yet, but is at any rate at stake, you 
will do. but you must remember that i am not as you are. there is a 
poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me, which must 
destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. oh, my friends, you know 
as well as i do, that my soul is at stake. and though i know there is 
one way out for me, you must not and i must not take it!" she looked 
appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband. 
"what is that way?" asked van helsing in a hoarse voice. "what is 
that way, which we must not, may not, take?" 
"that i may die now, either by my own hand or that of another, before 
the greater evil is entirely wrought. i know, and you know, that were 
i once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as 
you did my poor lucy's. were death, or the fear of death, the only 
thing that stood in the way i would not shrink to die here now, amidst 
the friends who love me. but death is not all. i cannot believe that 
to die in such a case, when there is hope before us and a bitter task 
to be done, is god's will. therefore, i on my part, give up here the 
certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the dark where may be the 
blackest things that the world or the nether world holds!" 
we were all silent, for we knew instinctively that this was only a 
prelude. the faces of the others were set, and harker's grew ashen 
grey. perhaps, he guessed better than any of us what was coming. 
she continued, "this is what i can give into the hotch-pot." i could 
not but note the quaint legal phrase which she used in such a place, 
and with all seriousness. "what will each of you give? your lives i 
know," she went on quickly, "that is easy for brave men. your lives 
are god's, and you can give them back to him, but what will you give 
to me?" she looked again questioningly, but this time avoided her 
husband's face. quincey seemed to understand, he nodded, and her face 
lit up. "then i shall tell you plainly what i want, for there must be 
no doubtful matter in this connection between us now. you must 
promise me, one and all, even you, my beloved husband, that should the 
time come, you will kill me." 
"what is that time?" the voice was quincey's, but it was low and 
strained. 
"when you shall be convinced that i am so changed that it is better 
that i die that i may live. when i am thus dead in the flesh, then 
you will, without a moment's delay, drive a stake through me and cut 
off my head, or do whatever else may be wanting to give me rest!" 
quincey was the first to rise after the pause. he knelt down before 
her and taking her hand in his said solemnly, "i'm only a rough 
fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a man should to win such a 
distinction, but i swear to you by all that i hold sacred and dear 
that, should the time ever come, i shall not flinch from the duty that 
you have set us. and i promise you, too, that i shall make all 
certain, for if i am only doubtful i shall take it that the time has 
come!" 
"my true friend!" was all she could say amid her fast-falling tears, 
as bending over, she kissed his hand. 
"i swear the same, my dear madam mina!" said van helsing. "and i!" 
said lord godalming, each of them in turn kneeling to her to take the 
oath. i followed, myself. 
then her husband turned to her wan-eyed and with a greenish pallor 
which subdued the snowy whiteness of his hair, and asked, "and must i, 
too, make such a promise, oh, my wife?" 
"you too, my dearest," she said, with infinite yearning of pity in her 
voice and eyes. "you must not shrink. you are nearest and dearest 
and all the world to me. our souls are knit into one, for all life 
and all time. think, dear, that there have been times when brave men 
have killed their wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling 
into the hands of the enemy. their hands did not falter any the more 
because those that they loved implored them to slay them. it is men's 
duty towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! and 
oh, my dear, if it is to be that i must meet death at any hand, let it 
be at the hand of him that loves me best. dr. van helsing, i have not 
forgotten your mercy in poor lucy's case to him who loved." she 
stopped with a flying blush, and changed her phrase, "to him who had 
best right to give her peace. if that time shall come again, i look 
to you to make it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was his 
loving hand which set me free from the awful thrall upon me." 
"again i swear!" came the professor's resonant voice. 
mrs. harker smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she 
leaned back and said, "and now one word of warning, a warning which 
you must never forget. this time, if it ever come, may come quickly 
and unexpectedly, and in such case you must lose no time in using your 
opportunity. at such a time i myself might be . . . nay! if the time 
ever come, shall be, leagued with your enemy against you. 
"one more request," she became very solemn as she said this, "it is 
not vital and necessary like the other, but i want you to do one thing 
for me, if you will." 
we all acquiesced, but no one spoke. there was no need to speak. 
"i want you to read the burial service." she was interrupted by a 
deep groan from her husband. taking his hand in hers, she held it 
over her heart, and continued. "you must read it over me some day. 
whatever may be the issue of all this fearful state of things, it will 
be a sweet thought to all or some of us. you, my dearest, will i hope 
read it, for then it will be in your voice in my memory forever, come 
what may!" 
"but oh, my dear one," he pleaded, "death is afar off from you." 
"nay," she said, holding up a warning hand. "i am deeper in death at 
this moment than if the weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me!" 
"oh, my wife, must i read it?" he said, before he began. 
"it would comfort me, my husband!" was all she said, and he began to 
read when she had got the book ready. 
how can i, how could anyone, tell of that strange scene, its 
solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror, and withal, its 
sweetness. even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of 
bitter truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been melted to 
the heart had he seen that little group of loving and devoted friends 
kneeling round that stricken and sorrowing lady; or heard the tender 
passion of her husband's voice, as in tones so broken and emotional 
that often he had to pause, he read the simple and beautiful service 
from the burial of the dead. i cannot go on . . . words . . . and 
v-voices . . . f-fail m-me! 
she was right in her instinct. strange as it was, bizarre as it may 
hereafter seem even to us who felt its potent influence at the time, 
it comforted us much. and the silence, which showed mrs. harker's 
coming relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem so full of 
despair to any of us as we had dreaded. 
jonathan harker's journal 
15 october, varna.-we left charing cross on the morning of the 12th, 
got to paris the same night, and took the places secured for us in the 
orient express. we traveled night and day, arriving here at about 
five o'clock. lord godalming went to the consulate to see if any 
telegram had arrived for him, whilst the rest of us came on to this 
hotel, "the odessus." the journey may have had incidents. i was, 
however, too eager to get on, to care for them. until the czarina 
catherine comes into port there will be no interest for me in anything 
in the wide world. thank god! mina is well, and looks to be getting 
stronger. her colour is coming back. she sleeps a great deal. 
throughout the journey she slept nearly all the time. before sunrise 
and sunset, however, she is very wakeful and alert. and it has become 
a habit for van helsing to hypnotize her at such times. at first, 
some effort was needed, and he had to make many passes. but now, she 
seems to yield at once, as if by habit, and scarcely any action is 
needed. he seems to have power at these particular moments to simply 
will, and her thoughts obey him. he always asks her what she can see 
and hear. 
she answers to the first, "nothing, all is dark." 
and to the second, "i can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and 
the water rushing by. canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards 
creak. the wind is high . . . i can hear it in the shrouds, and the 
bow throws back the foam." 
it is evident that the czarina catherine is still at sea, hastening on 
her way to varna. lord godalming has just returned. he had four 
telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect. 
that the czarina catherine had not been reported to lloyd's from 
anywhere. he had arranged before leaving london that his agent should 
send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. 
he was to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he 
might be sure that there was a watch being kept at the other end of 
the wire. 
we had dinner and went to bed early. tomorrow we are to see the vice 
consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board the ship as 
soon as she arrives. van helsing says that our chance will be to get 
on the boat between sunrise and sunset. the count, even if he takes 
the form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own volition, 
and so cannot leave the ship. as he dare not change to man's form 
without suspicion, which he evidently wishes to avoid, he must remain 
in the box. if, then, we can come on board after sunrise, he is at 
our mercy, for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of 
poor lucy, before he wakes. what mercy he shall get from us all will 
not count for much. we think that we shall not have much trouble with 
officials or the seamen. thank god! this is the country where 
bribery can do anything, and we are well supplied with money. we have 
only to make sure that the ship cannot come into port between sunset 
and sunrise without our being warned, and we shall be safe. judge 
moneybag will settle this case, i think! 
16 october.-mina's report still the same. lapping waves and rushing 
water, darkness and favouring winds. we are evidently in good time, 
and when we hear of the czarina catherine we shall be ready. as she 
must pass the dardanelles we are sure to have some report. 
17 october.-everything is pretty well fixed now, i think, to welcome 
the count on his return from his tour. godalming told the shippers 
that he fancied that the box sent aboard might contain something 
stolen from a friend of his, and got a half consent that he might open 
it at his own risk. the owner gave him a paper telling the captain to 
give him every facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship, 
and also a similar authorization to his agent at varna. we have seen 
the agent, who was much impressed with godalming's kindly manner to 
him, and we are all satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our 
wishes will be done. 
we have already arranged what to do in case we get the box open. if 
the count is there, van helsing and seward will cut off his head at 
once and drive a stake through his heart. morris and godalming and i 
shall prevent interference, even if we have to use the arms which we 
shall have ready. the professor says that if we can so treat the 
count's body, it will soon after fall into dust. in such case there 
would be no evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were 
aroused. but even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, 
and perhaps some day this very script may be evidence to come between 
some of us and a rope. for myself, i should take the chance only too 
thankfully if it were to come. we mean to leave no stone unturned to 
carry out our intent. we have arranged with certain officials that 
the instant the czarina catherine is seen, we are to be informed by a 
special messenger. 
24 october.-a whole week of waiting. daily telegrams to godalming, 
but only the same story. "not yet reported." mina's morning and 
evening hypnotic answer is unvaried. lapping waves, rushing water, 
and creaking masts. 
telegram, october 24th rufus smith, lloyd's, london, 
to lord godalming, care of h. b. m. vice consul, varna 
"czarina catherine reported this morning from dardanelles." 
dr. seward's diary 
25 october.-how i miss my phonograph! to write a diary with a pen is 
irksome to me! but van helsing says i must. we were all wild with 
excitement yesterday when godalming got his telegram from lloyd's. i 
know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. 
mrs. harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. 
after all, it is not strange that she did not, for we took special 
care not to let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to 
show any excitement when we were in her presence. in old days she 
would, i am sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tried to 
conceal it. but in this way she is greatly changed during the past 
three weeks. the lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong 
and well, and is getting back some of her colour, van helsing and i are 
not satisfied. we talk of her often. we have not, however, said a 
word to the others. it would break poor harker's heart, certainly his 
nerve, if he knew that we had even a suspicion on the subject. van 
helsing examines, he tells me, her teeth very carefully, whilst she is 
in the hypnotic condition, for he says that so long as they do not 
begin to sharpen there is no active danger of a change in her. if 
this change should come, it would be necessary to take steps! we both 
know what those steps would have to be, though we do not mention our 
thoughts to each other. we should neither of us shrink from the task, 
awful though it be to contemplate. "euthanasia" is an excellent and a 
comforting word! i am grateful to whoever invented it. 
it is only about 24 hours' sail from the dardanelles to here, at the 
rate the czarina catherine has come from london. she should therefore 
arrive some time in the morning, but as she cannot possibly get in 
before noon, we are all about to retire early. we shall get up at one 
o'clock, so as to be ready. 
25 october, noon.-no news yet of the ship's arrival. mrs. harker's 
hypnotic report this morning was the same as usual, so it is possible 
that we may get news at any moment. we men are all in a fever of 
excitement, except harker, who is calm. his hands are cold as ice, 
and an hour ago i found him whetting the edge of the great ghoorka 
knife which he now always carries with him. it will be a bad lookout 
for the count if the edge of that "kukri" ever touches his throat, 
driven by that stern, ice-cold hand! 
van helsing and i were a little alarmed about mrs. harker today. 
about noon she got into a sort of lethargy which we did not like. 
although we kept silence to the others, we were neither of us happy 
about it. she had been restless all the morning, so that we were at 
first glad to know that she was sleeping. when, however, her husband 
mentioned casually that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not 
wake her, we went to her room to see for ourselves. she was breathing 
naturally and looked so well and peaceful that we agreed that the 
sleep was better for her than anything else. poor girl, she has so 
much to forget that it is no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion 
to her, does her good. 
later.-our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep 
of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she had 
been for days. at sunset she made the usual hypnotic report. 
wherever he may be in the black sea, the count is hurrying to his 
destination. to his doom, i trust! 
26 october.-another day and no tidings of the czarina catherine. she 
ought to be here by now. that she is still journeying somewhere is 
apparent, for mrs. harker's hypnotic report at sunrise was still the 
same. it is possible that the vessel may be lying by, at times, for 
fog. some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches 
of fog both to north and south of the port. we must continue our 
watching, as the ship may now be signalled any moment. 
27 october, noon.-most strange. no news yet of the ship we wait for. 
mrs. harker reported last night and this morning as usual. "lapping 
waves and rushing water," though she added that "the waves were very 
faint." the telegrams from london have been the same, "no further 
report." van helsing is terribly anxious, and told me just now that he 
fears the count is escaping us. 
he added significantly, "i did not like that lethargy of madam mina's. 
souls and memories can do strange things during trance." i was about 
to ask him more, but harker just then came in, and he held up a 
warning hand. we must try tonight at sunset to make her speak more 
fully when in her hypnotic state. 
28 october.-telegram. rufus smith, london, to lord godalming, care 
h. b. m. vice consul, varna 
"czarina catherine reported entering galatz at one o'clock today." 
dr. seward's diary 
28 october.-when the telegram came announcing the arrival in galatz i 
do not think it was such a shock to any of us as might have been 
expected. true, we did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt 
would come. but i think we all expected that something strange would 
happen. the day of arrival at varna made us individually satisfied 
that things would not be just as we had expected. we only waited to 
learn where the change would occur. none the less, however, it was a 
surprise. i suppose that nature works on such a hopeful basis that we 
believe against ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not 
as we should know that they will be. transcendentalism is a beacon to 
the angels, even if it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. van helsing 
raised his hand over his head for a moment, as though in remonstrance 
with the almighty. but he said not a word, and in a few seconds stood 
up with his face sternly set. 
lord godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heavily. i was 
myself half stunned and looked in wonder at one after another. 
quincey morris tightened his belt with that quick movement which i 
knew so well. in our old wandering days it meant "action." mrs. 
harker grew ghastly white, so that the scar on her forehead seemed to 
burn, but she folded her hands meekly and looked up in prayer. harker 
smiled, actually smiled, the dark, bitter smile of one who is without 
hope, but at the same time his action belied his words, for his hands 
instinctively sought the hilt of the great kukri knife and rested 
there. 
"when does the next train start for galatz?" said van helsing to us 
generally. 
"at 6:30 tomorrow morning!" we all started, for the answer came from 
mrs. harker. 
"how on earth do you know?" said art. 
"you forget, or perhaps you do not know, though jonathan does and so 
does dr. van helsing, that i am the train fiend. at home in exeter i 
always used to make up the time tables, so as to be helpful to my 
husband. i found it so useful sometimes, that i always make a study 
of the time tables now. i knew that if anything were to take us to 
castle dracula we should go by galatz, or at any rate through 
bucharest, so i learned the times very carefully. unhappily there are 
not many to learn, as the only train tomorrow leaves as i say." 
"wonderful woman!" murmured the professor. 
"can't we get a special?" asked lord godalming. 
van helsing shook his head, "i fear not. this land is very different 
from yours or mine. even if we did have a special, it would probably 
not arrive as soon as our regular train. moreover, we have something 
to prepare. we must think. now let us organize. you, friend arthur, 
go to the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be ready for 
us to go in the morning. do you, friend jonathan, go to the agent of 
the ship and get from him letters to the agent in galatz, with 
authority to make a search of the ship just as it was here. quincey 
morris, you see the vice consul, and get his aid with his fellow in 
galatz and all he can do to make our way smooth, so that no times be 
lost when over the danube. john will stay with madam mina and me, and 
we shall consult. for so if time be long you may be delayed. and it 
will not matter when the sun set, since i am here with madam to make 
report." 
"and i," said mrs. harker brightly, and more like her old self than 
she had been for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways, 
and shall think and write for you as i used to do. something is 
shifting from me in some strange way, and i feel freer than i have 
been of late!" 
the three younger men looked happier at the moment as they seemed to 
realize the significance of her words. but van helsing and i, turning 
to each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. we said nothing 
at the time, however. 
when the three men had gone out to their tasks van helsing asked mrs. 
harker to look up the copy of the diaries and find him the part of 
harker's journal at the castle. she went away to get it. 
when the door was shut upon her he said to me, "we mean the same! 
speak out!" 
"here is some change. it is a hope that makes me sick, for it may 
deceive us." 
"quite so. do you know why i asked her to get the manuscript?" 
"no!" said i, "unless it was to get an opportunity of seeing me 
alone." 
"you are in part right, friend john, but only in part. i want to tell 
you something. and oh, my friend, i am taking a great, a terrible, 
risk. but i believe it is right. in the moment when madam mina said 
those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to 
me. in the trance of three days ago the count sent her his spirit to 
read her mind. or more like he took her to see him in his earth box 
in the ship with water rushing, just as it go free at rise and set of 
sun. he learn then that we are here, for she have more to tell in her 
open life with eyes to see ears to hear than he, shut as he is, in his 
coffin box. now he make his most effort to escape us. at present he 
want her not. 
"he is sure with his so great knowledge that she will come at his 
call. but he cut her off, take her, as he can do, out of his own 
power, that so she come not to him. ah! there i have hope that our 
man brains that have been of man so long and that have not lost the 
grace of god, will come higher than his child-brain that lie in his 
tomb for centuries, that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only 
work selfish and therefore small. here comes madam mina. not a word 
to her of her trance! she knows it not, and it would overwhelm her 
and make despair just when we want all her hope, all her courage, when 
most we want all her great brain which is trained like man's brain, 
but is of sweet woman and have a special power which the count give 
her, and which he may not take away altogether, though he think not 
so. hush! let me speak, and you shall learn. oh, john, my friend, 
we are in awful straits. i fear, as i never feared before. we can 
only trust the good god. silence! here she comes!" 
i thought that the professor was going to break down and have 
hysterics, just as he had when lucy died, but with a great effort he 
controlled himself and was at perfect nervous poise when mrs. harker 
tripped into the room, bright and happy looking and, in the doing of 
work, seemingly forgetful of her misery. as she came in, she handed a 
number of sheets of typewriting to van helsing. he looked over them 
gravely, his face brightening up as he read. 
then holding the pages between his finger and thumb he said, "friend 
john, to you with so much experience already, and you too, dear madam 
mina, that are young, here is a lesson. do not fear ever to think. a 
half thought has been buzzing often in my brain, but i fear to let him 
loose his wings. here now, with more knowledge, i go back to where 
that half thought come from and i find that he be no half thought at 
all. that be a whole thought, though so young that he is not yet 
strong to use his little wings. nay, like the 'ugly duck' of my 
friend hans andersen, he be no duck thought at all, but a big swan 
thought that sail nobly on big wings, when the time come for him to 
try them. see i read here what jonathan have written. 
"that other of his race who, in a later age, again and again, brought 
his forces over the great river into turkey land, who when he was 
beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had to come 
alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered, 
since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph. 
"what does this tell us? not much? no! the count's child thought 
see nothing, therefore he speak so free. your man thought see 
nothing. my man thought see nothing, till just now. no! but there 
comes another word from some one who speak without thought because 
she, too, know not what it mean, what it might mean. just as there 
are elements which rest, yet when in nature's course they move on 
their way and they touch, the pouf! and there comes a flash of light, 
heaven wide, that blind and kill and destroy some. but that show up 
all earth below for leagues and leagues. is it not so? well, i shall 
explain. to begin, have you ever study the philosophy of crime? 
'yes' and 'no.' you, john, yes, for it is a study of insanity. you, 
no, madam mina, for crime touch you not, not but once. still, your 
mind works true, and argues not a particulari ad universale. there is 
this peculiarity in criminals. it is so constant, in all countries 
and at all times, that even police, who know not much from philosophy, 
come to know it empirically, that it is. that is to be empiric. the 
criminal always work at one crime, that is the true criminal who seems 
predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. this criminal has 
not full man brain. he is clever and cunning and resourceful, but he 
be not of man stature as to brain. he be of child brain in much. now 
this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime also. he, too, have 
child brain, and it is of the child to do what he have done. the 
little bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not by 
principle, but empirically. and when he learn to do, then there is to 
him the ground to start from to do more. 'dos pou sto,' said 
archimedes. 'give me a fulcrum, and i shall move the world!' to do 
once, is the fulcrum whereby child brain become man brain. and until 
he have the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same again every 
time, just as he have done before! oh, my dear, i see that your eyes 
are opened, and that to you the lightning flash show all the leagues," 
for mrs. harker began to clap her hands and her eyes sparkled. 
he went on, "now you shall speak. tell us two dry men of science what 
you see with those so bright eyes." he took her hand and held it 
whilst he spoke. his finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as i 
thought instinctively and unconsciously, as she spoke. 
"the count is a criminal and of criminal type. nordau and lombroso 
would so classify him, and qua criminal he is of an imperfectly formed 
mind. thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit. his 
past is a clue, and the one page of it that we know, and that from his 
own lips, tells that once before, when in what mr. morris would call 
a 'tight place,' he went back to his own country from the land he had 
tried to invade, and thence, without losing purpose, prepared himself 
for a new effort. he came again better equipped for his work, and 
won. so he came to london to invade a new land. he was beaten, and 
when all hope of success was lost, and his existence in danger, he 
fled back over the sea to his home. just as formerly he had fled back 
over the danube from turkey land." 
"good, good! oh, you so clever lady!" said van helsing, 
enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand. a moment later 
he said to me, as calmly as though we had been having a sick room 
consultation, "seventy-two only, and in all this excitement. i have 
hope." 
turning to her again, he said with keen expectation, "but go on. go 
on! there is more to tell if you will. be not afraid. john and i 
know. i do in any case, and shall tell you if you are right. speak, 
without fear!" 
"i will try to. but you will forgive me if i seem too egotistical." 
"nay! fear not, you must be egotist, for it is of you that we think." 
"then, as he is criminal he is selfish. and as his intellect is small 
and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one 
purpose. that purpose is remorseless. as he fled back over the 
danube, leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on 
being safe, careless of all. so his own selfishness frees my soul 
somewhat from the terrible power which he acquired over me on that 
dreadful night. i felt it! oh, i felt it! thank god, for his great 
mercy! my soul is freer than it has been since that awful hour. and 
all that haunts me is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have 
used my knowledge for his ends." 
the professor stood up, "he has so used your mind, and by it he has 
left us here in varna, whilst the ship that carried him rushed through 
enveloping fog up to galatz, where, doubtless, he had made preparation 
for escaping from us. but his child mind only saw so far. and it may 
be that as ever is in god's providence, the very thing that the evil 
doer most reckoned on for his selfish good, turns out to be his 
chiefest harm. the hunter is taken in his own snare, as the great 
psalmist says. for now that he think he is free from every trace of 
us all, and that he has escaped us with so many hours to him, then his 
selfish child brain will whisper him to sleep. he think, too, that as 
he cut himself off from knowing your mind, there can be no knowledge 
of him to you. there is where he fail! that terrible baptism of 
blood which he give you makes you free to go to him in spirit, as you 
have as yet done in your times of freedom, when the sun rise and set. 
at such times you go by my volition and not by his. and this power to 
good of you and others, you have won from your suffering at his hands. 
this is now all more precious that he know it not, and to guard 
himself have even cut himself off from his knowledge of our where. 
we, however, are not selfish, and we believe that god is with us 
through all this blackness, and these many dark hours. we shall 
follow him, and we shall not flinch, even if we peril ourselves that 
we become like him. friend john, this has been a great hour, and it 
have done much to advance us on our way. you must be scribe and write 
him all down, so that when the others return from their work you can 
give it to them, then they shall know as we do." 
and so i have written it whilst we wait their return, and mrs. harker 
has written with the typewriter all since she brought the ms to us. 
chapter 26 
dr. seward's diary 
29 october.-this is written in the train from varna to galatz. last 
night we all assembled a little before the time of sunset. each of us 
had done his work as well as he could, so far as thought, and 
endeavour, and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our 
journey, and for our work when we get to galatz. when the usual time 
came round mrs. harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort, and 
after a longer and more serious effort on the part of van helsing than 
has been usually necessary, she sank into the trance. usually she 
speaks on a hint, but this time the professor had to ask her 
questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn 
anything. at last her answer came. 
"i can see nothing. we are still. there are no waves lapping, but 
only a steady swirl of water softly running against the hawser. i can 
hear men's voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of 
oars in the rowlocks. a gun is fired somewhere, the echo of it seems 
far away. there is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains 
are dragged along. what is this? there is a gleam of light. i can 
feel the air blowing upon me." 
here she stopped. she had risen, as if impulsively, from where she 
lay on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if 
lifting a weight. van helsing and i looked at each other with 
understanding. quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her 
intently, whilst harker's hand instinctively closed round the hilt of 
his kukri. there was a long pause. we all knew that the time when 
she could speak was passing, but we felt that it was useless to say 
anything. 
suddenly she sat up, and as she opened her eyes said sweetly, "would 
none of you like a cup of tea? you must all be so tired!" 
we could only make her happy, and so acqueisced. she bustled off to 
get tea. when she had gone van helsing said, "you see, my friends. he 
is close to land. he has left his earth chest. but he has yet to get 
on shore. in the night he may lie hidden somewhere, but if he be not 
carried on shore, or if the ship do not touch it, he cannot achieve 
the land. in such case he can, if it be in the night, change his form 
and jump or fly on shore, then, unless he be carried he cannot escape. 
and if he be carried, then the customs men may discover what the box 
contain. thus, in fine, if he escape not on shore tonight, or before 
dawn, there will be the whole day lost to him. we may then arrive in 
time. for if he escape not at night we shall come on him in daytime, 
boxed up and at our mercy. for he dare not be his true self, awake 
and visible, lest he be discovered." 
there was no more to be said, so we waited in patience until the dawn, 
at which time we might learn more from mrs. harker. 
early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her 
response in her trance. the hypnotic stage was even longer in coming 
than before, and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise 
was so short that we began to despair. van helsing seemed to throw 
his whole soul into the effort. at last, in obedience to his will she 
made reply. 
"all is dark. i hear lapping water, level with me, and some creaking 
as of wood on wood." she paused, and the red sun shot up. we must 
wait till tonight. 
and so it is that we are travelling towards galatz in an agony of 
expectation. we are due to arrive between two and three in the 
morning. but already, at bucharest, we are three hours late, so we 
cannot possibly get in till well after sunup. thus we shall have two 
more hypnotic messages from mrs. harker! either or both may possibly 
throw more light on what is happening. 
later.-sunset has come and gone. fortunately it came at a time when 
there was no distraction. for had it occurred whilst we were at a 
station, we might not have secured the necessary calm and isolation. 
mrs. harker yielded to the hypnotic influence even less readily than 
this morning. i am in fear that her power of reading the count's 
sensations may die away, just when we want it most. it seems to me 
that her imagination is beginning to work. whilst she has been in the 
trance hitherto she has confined herself to the simplest of facts. if 
this goes on it may ultimately mislead us. if i thought that the 
count's power over her would die away equally with her power of 
knowledge it would be a happy thought. but i am afraid that it may 
not be so. 
when she did speak, her words were enigmatical, "something is going 
out. i can feel it pass me like a cold wind. i can hear, far off, 
confused sounds, as of men talking in strange tongues, fierce falling 
water, and the howling of wolves." she stopped and a shudder ran 
through her, increasing in intensity for a few seconds, till at the 
end, she shook as though in a palsy. she said no more, even in answer 
to the professor's imperative questioning. when she woke from the 
trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid, but her mind was all 
alert. she could not remember anything, but asked what she had said. 
when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in 
silence. 
30 october, 7 a.m.-we are near galatz now, and i may not have time to 
write later. sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all. 
knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance, 
van helsing began his passes earlier than usual. they produced no 
effect, however, until the regular time, when she yielded with a still 
greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose. the professor 
lost no time in his questioning. 
her answer came with equal quickness, "all is dark. i hear water 
swirling by, level with my ears, and the creaking of wood on wood. 
cattle low far off. there is another sound, a queer one like . . ." 
she stopped and grew white, and whiter still. 
"go on, go on! speak, i command you!" said van helsing in an agonized 
voice. at the same time there was despair in his eyes, for the risen 
sun was reddening even mrs. harker's pale face. she opened her eyes, 
and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost 
unconcern. 
"oh, professor, why ask me to do what you know i can't? i don't 
remember anything." then, seeing the look of amazement on our faces, 
she said, turning from one to the other with a troubled look, "what 
have i said? what have i done? i know nothing, only that i was lying 
here, half asleep, and heard you say 'go on! speak, i command you!' it 
seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if i were a bad child!" 
"oh, madam mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof be needed, of 
how i love and honour you, when a word for your good, spoken more 
earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it is to order her whom 
i am proud to obey!" 
the whistles are sounding. we are nearing galatz. we are on fire 
with anxiety and eagerness. 
mina harker's journal 
30 october.-mr. morris took me to the hotel where our rooms had been 
ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared, since 
he does not speak any foreign language. the forces were distributed 
much as they had been at varna, except that lord godalming went to the 
vice consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some 
sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. jonathan and the two 
doctors went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival 
of the czarina catherine. 
later.-lord godalming has returned. the consul is away, and the vice 
consul sick. so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk. he 
was very obliging, and offered to do anything in his power. 
jonathan harker's journal 
30 october.-at nine o'clock dr. van helsing, dr. seward, and i called 
on messrs. mackenzie & steinkoff, the agents of the london firm of 
hapgood. they had received a wire from london, in answer to lord 
godalming's telegraphed request, asking them to show us any civility 
in their power. they were more than kind and courteous, and took us 
at once on board the czarina catherine, which lay at anchor out in the 
river harbor. there we saw the captain, donelson by name, who told us 
of his voyage. he said that in all his life he had never had so 
favourable a run. 
"man!" he said, "but it made us afeard, for we expect it that we 
should have to pay for it wi' some rare piece o' ill luck, so as to 
keep up the average. it's no canny to run frae london to the black 
sea wi' a wind ahint ye, as though the deil himself were blawin' on 
yer sail for his ain purpose. an' a' the time we could no speer a 
thing. gin we were nigh a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell 
on us and travelled wi' us, till when after it had lifted and we 
looked out, the deil a thing could we see. we ran by gibraltar wi' 
oot bein' able to signal. an' til we came to the dardanelles and had 
to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o' 
aught. at first i inclined to slack off sail and beat about till the 
fog was lifted. but whiles, i thocht that if the deil was minded to 
get us into the black sea quick, he was like to do it whether we would 
or no. if we had a quick voyage it would be no to our miscredit 
wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic, an' the old mon who had 
served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no hinderin' 
him." 
this mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial 
reasoning, aroused van helsing, who said, "mine friend, that devil is 
more clever than he is thought by some, and he know when he meet his 
match!" 
the skipper was not displeased with the compliment, and went on, "when 
we got past the bosphorus the men began to grumble. some o' them, the 
roumanians, came and asked me to heave overboard a big box which had 
been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just before we had 
started frae london. i had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out 
their twa fingers when they saw him, to guard them against the evil 
eye. man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly 
rideeculous! i sent them aboot their business pretty quick, but as 
just after a fog closed in on us i felt a wee bit as they did anent 
something, though i wouldn't say it was again the big box. well, on 
we went, and as the fog didn't let up for five days i joost let the 
wind carry us, for if the deil wanted to get somewheres, well, he 
would fetch it up a'reet. an' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp 
lookout anyhow. sure eneuch, we had a fair way and deep water all the 
time. and two days ago, when the mornin' sun came through the fog, we 
found ourselves just in the river opposite galatz. the roumanians 
were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the box and fling 
it in the river. i had to argy wi' them aboot it wi' a handspike. an' 
when the last o' them rose off the deck wi' his head in his hand, i 
had convinced them that, evil eye or no evil eye, the property and the 
trust of my owners were better in my hands than in the river danube. 
they had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to fling in, and as 
it was marked galatz via varna, i thocht i'd let it lie till we 
discharged in the port an' get rid o't althegither. we didn't do much 
clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor. but in the 
mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sunup, a man came aboard wi' 
an order, written to him from england, to receive a box marked for one 
count dracula. sure eneuch the matter was one ready to his hand. he 
had his papers a' reet, an' glad i was to be rid o' the dam' thing, 
for i was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it. if the deil did have 
any luggage aboord the ship, i'm thinkin' it was nane ither than that 
same!" 
"what was the name of the man who took it?" asked dr. van helsing with 
restrained eagerness. 
"i'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and stepping down to his 
cabin, produced a receipt signed "immanuel hildesheim." burgen-strasse 
16 was the address. we found out that this was all the captain knew, 
so with thanks we came away. 
we found hildesheim in his office, a hebrew of rather the adelphi 
theatre type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez. his arguments were 
pointed with specie, we doing the punctuation, and with a little 
bargaining he told us what he knew. this turned out to be simple but 
important. he had received a letter from mr. de ville of london, 
telling him to receive, if possible before sunrise so as to avoid 
customs, a box which would arrive at galatz in the czarina catherine. 
this he was to give in charge to a certain petrof skinsky, who dealt 
with the slovaks who traded down the river to the port. he had been 
paid for his work by an english bank note, which had been duly cashed 
for gold at the danube international bank. when skinsky had come to 
him, he had taken him to the ship and handed over the box, so as to 
save porterage. that was all he knew. 
we then sought for skinsky, but were unable to find him. one of his 
neighbors, who did not seem to bear him any affection, said that he 
had gone away two days before, no one knew whither. this was 
corroborated by his landlord, who had received by messenger the key of 
the house together with the rent due, in english money. this had been 
between ten and eleven o'clock last night. we were at a standstill 
again. 
whilst we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out 
that the body of skinsky had been found inside the wall of the 
churchyard of st. peter, and that the throat had been torn open as if 
by some wild animal. those we had been speaking with ran off to see 
the horror, the women crying out. "this is the work of a slovak!" we 
hurried away lest we should have been in some way drawn into the 
affair, and so detained. 
as we came home we could arrive at no definite conclusion. we were 
all convinced that the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere, but 
where that might be we would have to discover. with heavy hearts we 
came home to the hotel to mina. 
when we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking mina 
again into our confidence. things are getting desperate, and it is at 
least a chance, though a hazardous one. as a preliminary step, i was 
released from my promise to her. 
mina harker's journal 
30 october, evening.-they were so tired and worn out and dispirited 
that there was nothing to be done till they had some rest, so i asked 
them all to lie down for half an hour whilst i should enter everything 
up to the moment. i feel so grateful to the man who invented the 
"traveller's" typewriter, and to mr. morris for getting this one for 
me. i should have felt quite astray doing the work if i had to write 
with a pen . . . 
it is all done. poor dear, dear jonathan, what he must have suffered, 
what he must be suffering now. he lies on the sofa hardly seeming to 
breathe, and his whole body appears in collapse. his brows are knit. 
his face is drawn with pain. poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and i 
can see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his 
thoughts. oh! if i could only help at all. i shall do what i can. 
i have asked dr. van helsing, and he has got me all the papers that i 
have not yet seen. whilst they are resting, i shall go over all 
carefully, and perhaps i may arrive at some conclusion. i shall try 
to follow the professor's example, and think without prejudice on the 
facts before me . . . 
i do believe that under god's providence i have made a discovery. i 
shall get the maps and look over them. 
i am more than ever sure that i am right. my new conclusion is ready, 
so i shall get our party together and read it. they can judge it. it 
is well to be accurate, and every minute is precious. 
mina harker's memorandum 
(entered in her journal) 
ground of inquiry.-count dracula's problem is to get back 
to his own place. 
(a) he must be brought back by some one. this is evident; 
for had he power to move himself as he wished he could go 
either as man, or wolf, or bat, or in some other way. he 
evidently fears discovery or interference, in the state of 
helplessness in which he must be, confined as he is between 
dawn and sunset in his wooden box. 
(b) how is he to be taken?-here a process of exclusions may 
help us. by road, by rail, by water? 
1. by road.-there are endless difficulties, especially in 
leaving the city. 
(x) there are people. and people are curious, and 
investigate. a hint, a surmise, a doubt as to what might 
be in the box, would destroy him. 
(y) there are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers 
to pass. 
(z) his pursuers might follow. this is his highest fear. 
and in order to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, 
so far as he can, even his victim, me! 
2. by rail.-there is no one in charge of the box. it 
would have to take its chance of being delayed, and delay 
would be fatal, with enemies on the track. true, he might 
escape at night. but what would he be, if left in a strange 
place with no refuge that he could fly to? this is not what he 
intends, and he does not mean to risk it. 
3. by water.-here is the safest way, in one respect, but 
with most danger in another. on the water he is powerless 
except at night. even then he can only summon fog and storm and 
snow and his wolves. but were he wrecked, the living water would 
engulf him, helpless, and he would indeed be lost. he could have 
the vessel drive to land, but if it were unfriendly land, wherein 
he was not free to move, his position would still be desperate. 
we know from the record that he was on the water, so what 
we have to do is to ascertain what water. 
the first thing is to realize exactly what he has done as 
yet. we may, then, get a light on what his task is to be. 
firstly.-we must differentiate between what he did in 
london as part of his general plan of action, when he was 
pressed for moments and had to arrange as best he could. 
secondly.-we must see, as well as we can surmise it from the 
facts we know of, what he has done here. 
as to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at galatz, 
and sent invoice to varna to deceive us lest we should ascertain 
his means of exit from england. his immediate and sole purpose 
then was to escape. the proof of this, is the letter of 
instructions sent to immanuel hildesheim to clear and take away 
the box before sunrise. there is also the instruction to petrof 
skinsky. these we must only guess at, but there must have been 
some letter or message, since skinsky came to hildesheim. 
that, so far, his plans were successful we know. the czarina 
catherine made a phenomenally quick journey. so much so that 
captain donelson's suspicions were aroused. but his superstition 
united with his canniness played the count's game for him, and he 
ran with his favouring wind through fogs and all till he brought 
up blindfold at galatz. that the count's arrangements were well 
made, has been proved. hildesheim cleared the box, took it off, 
and gave it to skinsky. skinsky took it, and here we lose the 
trail. we only know that the box is somewhere on the water, 
moving along. the customs and the octroi, if there be any, have 
been avoided. 
now we come to what the count must have done after his 
arrival, on land, at galatz. 
the box was given to skinsky before sunrise. at sunrise 
the count could appear in his own form. here, we ask why 
skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? in my husband's 
diary, skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the slovaks who trade 
down the river to the port. and the man's remark, that the 
murder was the work of a slovak, showed the general feeling 
against his class. the count wanted isolation. 
my surmise is this, that in london the count decided to get 
back to his castle by water, as the most safe and secret 
way. he was brought from the castle by szgany, and probably they 
delivered their cargo to slovaks who took the boxes to varna, for 
there they were shipped to london. thus the count had knowledge 
of the persons who could arrange this service. when the box was 
on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he came out from his 
box, met skinsky and instructed him what to do as to arranging 
the carriage of the box up some river. when this was done, and 
he knew that all was in train, he blotted out his traces, as he 
thought, by murdering his agent. 
i have examined the map and find that the river most 
suitable for the slovaks to have ascended is either the 
pruth or the sereth. i read in the typescript that in my 
trance i heard cows low and water swirling level with my 
ears and the creaking of wood. the count in his box, then, 
was on a river in an open boat, propelled probably either 
by oars or poles, for the banks are near and it is working 
against stream. there would be no such if floating down 
stream. 
of course it may not be either the sereth or the pruth, but 
we may possibly investigate further. now of these two, the 
pruth is the more easily navigated, but the sereth is, at 
fundu, joined by the bistritza which runs up round the borgo 
pass. the loop it makes is manifestly as close to dracula's 
castle as can be got by water. 
mina harker's journal-continued 
when i had done reading, jonathan took me in his arms and kissed me. 
the others kept shaking me by both hands, and dr. van helsing said, 
"our dear madam mina is once more our teacher. her eyes have been 
where we were blinded. now we are on the track once again, and this 
time we may succeed. our enemy is at his most helpless. and if we 
can come on him by day, on the water, our task will be over. he has a 
start, but he is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave this box 
lest those who carry him may suspect. for them to suspect would be to 
prompt them to throw him in the stream where he perish. this he 
knows, and will not. now men, to our council of war, for here and 
now, we must plan what each and all shall do." 
"i shall get a steam launch and follow him," said lord godalming. 
"and i, horses to follow on the bank lest by chance he land," said mr. 
morris. 
"good!" said the professor, "both good. but neither must go alone. 
there must be force to overcome force if need be. the slovak is 
strong and rough, and he carries rude arms." all the men smiled, for 
amongst them they carried a small arsenal. 
said mr. morris, "i have brought some winchesters. they are pretty 
handy in a crowd, and there may be wolves. the count, if you 
remember, took some other precautions. he made some requisitions on 
others that mrs. harker could not quite hear or understand. we must 
be ready at all points." 
dr. seward said, "i think i had better go with quincey. we have been 
accustomed to hunt together, and we two, well armed, will be a match 
for whatever may come along. you must not be alone, art. it may be 
necessary to fight the slovaks, and a chance thrust, for i don't 
suppose these fellows carry guns, would undo all our plans. there 
must be no chances, this time. we shall not rest until the count's 
head and body have been separated, and we are sure that he cannot 
reincarnate." 
he looked at jonathan as he spoke, and jonathan looked at me. i could 
see that the poor dear was torn about in his mind. of course he 
wanted to be with me. but then the boat service would, most likely, 
be the one which would destroy the . . . the . . . vampire. (why did 
i hesitate to write the word?) 
he was silent awhile, and during his silence dr. van helsing spoke, 
"friend jonathan, this is to you for twice reasons. first, because 
you are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed 
at the last. and again that it is your right to destroy him. that, 
which has wrought such woe to you and yours. be not afraid for madam 
mina. she will be my care, if i may. i am old. my legs are not so 
quick to run as once. and i am not used to ride so long or to pursue 
as need be, or to fight with lethal weapons. but i can be of other 
service. i can fight in other way. and i can die, if need be, as 
well as younger men. now let me say that what i would is this. while 
you, my lord godalming and friend jonathan go in your so swift little 
steamboat up the river, and whilst john and quincey guard the bank 
where perchance he might be landed, i will take madam mina right into 
the heart of the enemy's country. whilst the old fox is tied in his 
box, floating on the running stream whence he cannot escape to land, 
where he dares not raise the lid of his coffin box lest his slovak 
carriers should in fear leave him to perish, we shall go in the track 
where jonathan went, from bistritz over the borgo, and find our way to 
the castle of dracula. here, madam mina's hypnotic power will surely 
help, and we shall find our way, all dark and unknown otherwise, after 
the first sunrise when we are near that fateful place. there is much 
to be done, and other places to be made sanctify, so that that nest of 
vipers be obliterated." 
here jonathan interrupted him hotly, "do you mean to say, professor 
van helsing, that you would bring mina, in her sad case and tainted as 
she is with that devil's illness, right into the jaws of his 
deathtrap? not for the world! not for heaven or hell!" 
he became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on, "do you 
know what the place is? have you seen that awful den of hellish 
infamy, with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every 
speck of dust that whirls in the wind a devouring monster in embryo? 
have you felt the vampire's lips upon your throat?" 
here he turned to me, and as his eyes lit on my forehead he threw up 
his arms with a cry, "oh, my god, what have we done to have this 
terror upon us?" and he sank down on the sofa in a collapse of misery. 
the professor's voice, as he spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed 
to vibrate in the air, calmed us all. 
"oh, my friend, it is because i would save madam mina from that awful 
place that i would go. god forbid that i should take her into that 
place. there is work, wild work, to be done before that place can be 
purify. remember that we are in terrible straits. if the count 
escape us this time, and he is strong and subtle and cunning, he may 
choose to sleep him for a century, and then in time our dear one," he 
took my hand, "would come to him to keep him company, and would be as 
those others that you, jonathan, saw. you have told us of their 
gloating lips. you heard their ribald laugh as they clutched the 
moving bag that the count threw to them. you shudder, and well may it 
be. forgive me that i make you so much pain, but it is necessary. my 
friend, is it not a dire need for that which i am giving, possibly my 
life? if it were that any one went into that place to stay, it is i 
who would have to go to keep them company." 
"do as you will," said jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, 
"we are in the hands of god!" 
later.-oh, it did me good to see the way that these brave men worked. 
how can women help loving men when they are so earnest, and so true, 
and so brave! and, too, it made me think of the wonderful power of 
money! what can it not do when basely used. i felt so thankful that 
lord godalming is rich, and both he and mr. morris, who also has 
plenty of money, are willing to spend it so freely. for if they did 
not, our little expedition could not start, either so promptly or so 
well equipped, as it will within another hour. it is not three hours 
since it was arranged what part each of us was to do. and now lord 
godalming and jonathan have a lovely steam launch, with steam up ready 
to start at a moment's notice. dr. seward and mr. morris have half a 
dozen good horses, well appointed. we have all the maps and 
appliances of various kinds that can be had. professor van helsing 
and i are to leave by the 11:40 train tonight for veresti, where we 
are to get a carriage to drive to the borgo pass. we are bringing a 
good deal of ready money, as we are to buy a carriage and horses. we 
shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can trust in the 
matter. the professor knows something of a great many languages, so 
we shall get on all right. we have all got arms, even for me a large 
bore revolver. jonathan would not be happy unless i was armed like 
the rest. alas! i cannot carry one arm that the rest do, the scar on 
my forehead forbids that. dear dr. van helsing comforts me by telling 
me that i am fully armed as there may be wolves. the weather is 
getting colder every hour, and there are snow flurries which come and 
go as warnings. 
later.-it took all my courage to say goodbye to my darling. we may 
never meet again. courage, mina! the professor is looking at you 
keenly. his look is a warning. there must be no tears now, unless it 
may be that god will let them fall in gladness. 
jonathan harker's journal 
30 october, night.-i am writing this in the light from the furnace 
door of the steam launch. lord godalming is firing up. he is an 
experienced hand at the work, as he has had for years a launch of his 
own on the thames, and another on the norfolk broads. regarding our 
plans, we finally decided that mina's guess was correct, and that if 
any waterway was chosen for the count's escape back to his castle, the 
sereth and then the bistritza at its junction, would be the one. we 
took it, that somewhere about the 47th degree, north latitude, would 
be the place chosen for crossing the country between the river and the 
carpathians. we have no fear in running at good speed up the river at 
night. there is plenty of water, and the banks are wide enough apart 
to make steaming, even in the dark, easy enough. lord godalming tells 
me to sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one to be 
on watch. but i cannot sleep, how can i with the terrible danger 
hanging over my darling, and her going out into that awful place . . . 
my only comfort is that we are in the hands of god. only for that 
faith it would be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all 
the trouble. mr. morris and dr. seward were off on their long ride 
before we started. they are to keep up the right bank, far enough off 
to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and 
avoid the following of its curves. they have, for the first stages, 
two men to ride and lead their spare horses, four in all, so as not to 
excite curiosity. when they dismiss the men, which shall be shortly, 
they shall themselves look after the horses. it may be necessary for 
us to join forces. if so they can mount our whole party. one of the 
saddles has a moveable horn, and can be easily adapted for mina, if 
required. 
it is a wild adventure we are on. here, as we are rushing along 
through the darkness, with the cold from the river seeming to rise up 
and strike us, with all the mysterious voices of the night around us, 
it all comes home. we seem to be drifting into unknown places and 
unknown ways. into a whole world of dark and dreadful things. 
godalming is shutting the furnace door . . . 
31 october.-still hurrying along. the day has come, and godalming is 
sleeping. i am on watch. the morning is bitterly cold, the furnace 
heat is grateful, though we have heavy fur coats. as yet we have 
passed only a few open boats, but none of them had on board any box or 
package of anything like the size of the one we seek. the men were 
scared every time we turned our electric lamp on them, and fell on 
their knees and prayed. 
1 november, evening.-no news all day. we have found nothing of the 
kind we seek. we have now passed into the bistritza, and if we are 
wrong in our surmise our chance is gone. we have overhauled every 
boat, big and little. early this morning, one crew took us for a 
government boat, and treated us accordingly. we saw in this a way of 
smoothing matters, so at fundu, where the bistritza runs into the 
sereth, we got a roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously. with 
every boat which we have overhauled since then this trick has 
succeeded. we have had every deference shown to us, and not once any 
objection to whatever we chose to ask or do. some of the slovaks tell 
us that a big boat passed them, going at more than usual speed as she 
had a double crew on board. this was before they came to fundu, so 
they could not tell us whether the boat turned into the bistritza or 
continued on up the sereth. at fundu we could not hear of any such 
boat, so she must have passed there in the night. i am feeling very 
sleepy. the cold is perhaps beginning to tell upon me, and nature 
must have rest some time. godalming insists that he shall keep the 
first watch. god bless him for all his goodness to poor dear mina and 
me. 
2 november, morning.-it is broad daylight. that good fellow would 
not wake me. he says it would have been a sin to, for i slept 
peacefully and was forgetting my trouble. it seems brutally selfish 
to me to have slept so long, and let him watch all night, but he was 
quite right. i am a new man this morning. and, as i sit here and 
watch him sleeping, i can do all that is necessary both as to minding 
the engine, steering, and keeping watch. i can feel that my strength 
and energy are coming back to me. i wonder where mina is now, and van 
helsing. they should have got to veresti about noon on wednesday. it 
would take them some time to get the carriage and horses. so if they 
had started and travelled hard, they would be about now at the borgo 
pass. god guide and help them! i am afraid to think what may 
happen. if we could only go faster. but we cannot. the engines are 
throbbing and doing their utmost. i wonder how dr. seward and mr. 
morris are getting on. there seem to be endless streams running down 
the mountains into this river, but as none of them are very large, at 
present, at all events, though they are doubtless terrible in winter 
and when the snow melts, the horsemen may not have met much 
obstruction. i hope that before we get to strasba we may see them. 
for if by that time we have not overtaken the count, it may be 
necessary to take counsel together what to do next. 
dr. seward's diary 
2 november.-three days on the road. no news, and no time to write it 
if there had been, for every moment is precious. we have had only the 
rest needful for the horses. but we are both bearing it wonderfully. 
those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. we must push 
on. we shall never feel happy till we get the launch in sight again. 
3 november.-we heard at fundu that the launch had gone up the 
bistritza. i wish it wasn't so cold. there are signs of snow coming. 
and if it falls heavy it will stop us. in such case we must get a 
sledge and go on, russian fashion. 
4 november.-today we heard of the launch having been detained by an 
accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. the slovak boats 
get up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. some 
went up only a few hours before. godalming is an amateur fitter 
himself, and evidently it was he who put the launch in trim again. 
finally, they got up the rapids all right, with local help, and are off 
on the chase afresh. i fear that the boat is not any better for the 
accident, the peasantry tell us that after she got upon smooth water 
again, she kept stopping every now and again so long as she was in 
sight. we must push on harder than ever. our help may be wanted 
soon. 
mina harker's journal 
31 october.-arrived at veresti at noon. the professor tells me that 
this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotize me at all, and that all 
i could say was, "dark and quiet." he is off now buying a carriage 
and horses. he says that he will later on try to buy additional 
horses, so that we may be able to change them on the way. we have 
something more than 70 miles before us. the country is lovely, and 
most interesting. if only we were under different conditions, how 
delightful it would be to see it all. if jonathan and i were driving 
through it alone what a pleasure it would be. to stop and see people, 
and learn something of their life, and to fill our minds and memories 
with all the colour and picturesqueness of the whole wild, beautiful 
country and the quaint people! but, alas! 
later.-dr. van helsing has returned. he has got the carriage and 
horses. we are to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. the 
landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions. it seems 
enough for a company of soldiers. the professor encourages her, and 
whispers to me that it may be a week before we can get any food again. 
he has been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful lot of 
fur coats and wraps, and all sorts of warm things. there will not be 
any chance of our being cold. 
we shall soon be off. i am afraid to think what may happen to us. we 
are truly in the hands of god. he alone knows what may be, and i pray 
him, with all the strength of my sad and humble soul, that he will 
watch over my beloved husband. that whatever may happen, jonathan may 
know that i loved him and honoured him more than i can say, and that my 
latest and truest thought will be always for him. 
chapter 27 
mina harker's journal 
1 november.-all day long we have travelled, and at a good speed. the 
horses seem to know that they are being kindly treated, for they go 
willingly their full stage at best speed. we have now had so many 
changes and find the same thing so constantly that we are encouraged 
to think that the journey will be an easy one. dr. van helsing is 
laconic, he tells the farmers that he is hurrying to bistritz, and 
pays them well to make the exchange of horses. we get hot soup, or 
coffee, or tea, and off we go. it is a lovely country. full of 
beauties of all imaginable kinds, and the people are brave, and 
strong, and simple, and seem full of nice qualities. they are very, 
very superstitious. in the first house where we stopped, when the 
woman who served us saw the scar on my forehead, she crossed herself 
and put out two fingers towards me, to keep off the evil eye. i 
believe they went to the trouble of putting an extra amount of garlic 
into our food, and i can't abide garlic. ever since then i have taken 
care not to take off my hat or veil, and so have escaped their 
suspicions. we are travelling fast, and as we have no driver with us 
to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal. but i daresay that fear of 
the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the way. the professor 
seems tireless. all day he would not take any rest, though he made me 
sleep for a long spell. at sunset time he hypnotized me, and he says 
i answered as usual, "darkness, lapping water and creaking wood." so 
our enemy is still on the river. i am afraid to think of jonathan, 
but somehow i have now no fear for him, or for myself. i write this 
whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be ready. dr. van 
helsing is sleeping. poor dear, he looks very tired and old and grey, 
but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's. even in his sleep he 
is intense with resolution. when we have well started i must make him 
rest whilst i drive. i shall tell him that we have days before us, 
and he must not break down when most of all his strength will be 
needed . . . all is ready. we are off shortly. 
2 november, morning.-i was successful, and we took turns driving all 
night. now the day is on us, bright though cold. there is a strange 
heaviness in the air. i say heaviness for want of a better word. i 
mean that it oppresses us both. it is very cold, and only our warm 
furs keep us comfortable. at dawn van helsing hypnotized me. he says 
i answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river 
is changing as they ascend. i do hope that my darling will not run 
any chance of danger, more than need be, but we are in god's hands. 
2 november, night.-all day long driving. the country gets wilder as 
we go, and the great spurs of the carpathians, which at veresti seemed 
so far from us and so low on the horizon, now seem to gather round us 
and tower in front. we both seem in good spirits. i think we make an 
effort each to cheer the other, in the doing so we cheer ourselves. 
dr. van helsing says that by morning we shall reach the borgo pass. 
the houses are very few here now, and the professor says that the last 
horse we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to 
change. he got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we 
have a rude four-in-hand. the dear horses are patient and good, and 
they give us no trouble. we are not worried with other travellers, 
and so even i can drive. we shall get to the pass in daylight. we do 
not want to arrive before. so we take it easy, and have each a long 
rest in turn. oh, what will tomorrow bring to us? we go to seek the 
place where my poor darling suffered so much. god grant that we may 
be guided aright, and that he will deign to watch over my husband and 
those dear to us both, and who are in such deadly peril. as for me, i 
am not worthy in his sight. alas! i am unclean to his eyes, and 
shall be until he may deign to let me stand forth in his sight as one 
of those who have not incurred his wrath. 
memorandum by abraham van helsing 
4 november.-this to my old and true friend john seward, m.d., 
of purfleet, london, in case i may not see him. it may 
explain. it is morning, and i write by a fire which all 
the night i have kept alive, madam mina aiding me. it is 
cold, cold. so cold that the grey heavy sky is full of 
snow, which when it falls will settle for all winter as the 
ground is hardening to receive it. it seems to have affected 
madam mina. she has been so heavy of head all day that she was 
not like herself. she sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! she who 
is usual so alert, have done literally nothing all the day. she 
even have lost her appetite. she make no entry into her little 
diary, she who write so faithful at every pause. something 
whisper to me that all is not well. however, tonight she is more 
/vif/. her long sleep all day have refresh and restore her, for 
now she is all sweet and bright as ever. at sunset i try to 
hypnotize her, but alas! with no effect. the power has grown 
less and less with each day, and tonight it fail me altogether. 
well, god's will be done, whatever it may be, and whithersoever 
it may lead! 
now to the historical, for as madam mina write not in her 
stenography, i must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so 
each day of us may not go unrecorded. 
we got to the borgo pass just after sunrise yesterday 
morning. when i saw the signs of the dawn i got ready for 
the hypnotism. we stopped our carriage, and got down so 
that there might be no disturbance. i made a couch with 
furs, and madam mina, lying down, yield herself as usual, 
but more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnotic 
sleep. as before, came the answer, "darkness and the swirling of 
water." then she woke, bright and radiant and we go on our way 
and soon reach the pass. at this time and place, she become all 
on fire with zeal. some new guiding power be in her manifested, 
for she point to a road and say, "this is the way." 
"how know you it?" i ask. 
"of course i know it," she answer, and with a pause, add, 
"have not my jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?" 
at first i think somewhat strange, but soon i see that there be 
only one such byroad. it is used but little, and very different 
from the coach road from the bukovina to bistritz, which is more 
wide and hard, and more of use. 
so we came down this road. when we meet other ways, not 
always were we sure that they were roads at all, for they 
be neglect and light snow have fallen, the horses know and 
they only. i give rein to them, and they go on so patient. by 
and by we find all the things which jonathan have note in that 
wonderful diary of him. then we go on for long, long hours and 
hours. at the first, i tell madam mina to sleep. she try, and 
she succeed. she sleep all the time, till at the last, i feel 
myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. but she 
sleep on, and i may not wake her though i try. i do not wish to 
try too hard lest i harm her. for i know that she have suffer 
much, and sleep at times be all-in-all to her. i think i drowse 
myself, for all of sudden i feel guilt, as though i have done 
something. i find myself bolt up, with the reins in my hand, and 
the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. i look down and 
find madam mina still asleep. it is now not far off sunset time, 
and over the snow the light of the sun flow in big yellow flood, 
so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so 
steep. for we are going up, and up, and all is oh so wild and 
rocky, as though it were the end of the world. 
then i arouse madam mina. this time she wake with not much 
trouble, and then i try to put her to hypnotic sleep. but 
she sleep not, being as though i were not. still i try and 
try, till all at once i find her and myself in dark, so i 
look round, and find that the sun have gone down. madam 
mina laugh, and i turn and look at her. she is now quite 
awake, and look so well as i never saw her since that night 
at carfax when we first enter the count's house. i am amaze, and 
not at ease then. but she is so bright and tender and thoughtful 
for me that i forget all fear. i light a fire, for we have 
brought supply of wood with us, and she prepare food while i undo 
the horses and set them, tethered in shelter, to feed. then when 
i return to the fire she have my supper ready. i go to help her, 
but she smile, and tell me that she have eat already. that she 
was so hungry that she would not wait. i like it not, and i have 
grave doubts. but i fear to affright her, and so i am silent of 
it. she help me and i eat alone, and then we wrap in fur and lie 
beside the fire, and i tell her to sleep while i watch. but 
presently i forget all of watching. and when i sudden remember 
that i watch, i find her lying quiet, but awake, and looking at 
me with so bright eyes. once, twice more the same occur, and i 
get much sleep till before morning. when i wake i try to 
hypnotize her, but alas! though she shut her eyes obedient, she 
may not sleep. the sun rise up, and up, and up, and then sleep 
come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not wake. i 
have to lift her up, and place her sleeping in the carriage when 
i have harnessed the horses and made all ready. madam still 
sleep, and she look in her sleep more healthy and more redder 
than before. and i like it not. and i am afraid, afraid, 
afraid! i am afraid of all things, even to think but i must go 
on my way. the stake we play for is life and death, or more than 
these, and we must not flinch. 
5 november, morning.-let me be accurate in everything, for 
though you and i have seen some strange things together, 
you may at the first think that i, van helsing, am mad. 
that the many horrors and the so long strain on nerves has 
at the last turn my brain. 
all yesterday we travel, always getting closer to the 
mountains, and moving into a more and more wild and desert 
land. there are great, frowning precipices and much falling 
water, and nature seem to have held sometime her carnival. madam 
mina still sleep and sleep. and though i did have hunger and 
appeased it, i could not waken her, even for food. i began to 
fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon her, tainted as 
she is with that vampire baptism. "well," said i to myself, "if 
it be that she sleep all the day, it shall also be that i do not 
sleep at night." as we travel on the rough road, for a road of 
an ancient and imperfect kind there was, i held down my head and 
slept. 
again i waked with a sense of guilt and of time passed, and 
found madam mina still sleeping, and the sun low down. but 
all was indeed changed. the frowning mountains seemed further 
away, and we were near the top of a steep rising hill, on summit 
of which was such a castle as jonathan tell of in his diary. at 
once i exulted and feared. for now, for good or ill, the end was 
near. 
i woke madam mina, and again tried to hypnotize her, but 
alas! unavailing till too late. then, ere the great dark 
came upon us, for even after down sun the heavens reflected 
the gone sun on the snow, and all was for a time in a great 
twilight. i took out the horses and fed them in what shelter i 
could. then i make a fire, and near it i make madam mina, now 
awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. 
i got ready food, but she would not eat, simply saying that she 
had not hunger. i did not press her, knowing her unavailingness. 
but i myself eat, for i must needs now be strong for all. then, 
with the fear on me of what might be, i drew a ring so big for 
her comfort, round where madam mina sat. and over the ring i 
passed some of the wafer, and i broke it fine so that all was 
well guarded. she sat still all the time, so still as one dead. 
and she grew whiter and even whiter till the snow was not more 
pale, and no word she said. but when i drew near, she clung to 
me, and i could know that the poor soul shook her from head to 
feet with a tremor that was pain to feel. 
i said to her presently, when she had grown more quiet, 
"will you not come over to the fire?" for i wished to make 
a test of what she could. she rose obedient, but when she 
have made a step she stopped, and stood as one stricken. 
"why not go on?" i asked. she shook her head, and coming 
back, sat down in her place. then, looking at me with open 
eyes, as of one waked from sleep, she said simply, "i cannot!" 
and remained silent. i rejoiced, for i knew that what she could 
not, none of those that we dreaded could. though there might be 
danger to her body, yet her soul was safe! 
presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their 
tethers till i came to them and quieted them. when they 
did feel my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and 
licked at my hands and were quiet for a time. many times 
through the night did i come to them, till it arrive to the 
cold hour when all nature is at lowest, and every time my 
coming was with quiet of them. in the cold hour the fire 
began to die, and i was about stepping forth to replenish 
it, for now the snow came in flying sweeps and with it a 
chill mist. even in the dark there was a light of some 
kind, as there ever is over snow, and it seemed as though 
the snow flurries and the wreaths of mist took shape as of 
women with trailing garments. all was in dead, grim silence only 
that the horses whinnied and cowered, as if in terror of the 
worst. i began to fear, horrible fears. but then came to me the 
sense of safety in that ring wherein i stood. i began too, to 
think that my imaginings were of the night, and the gloom, and 
the unrest that i have gone through, and all the terrible 
anxiety. it was as though my memories of all jonathan's horrid 
experience were befooling me. for the snow flakes and the mist 
began to wheel and circle round, till i could get as though a 
shadowy glimpse of those women that would have kissed him. and 
then the horses cowered lower and lower, and moaned in terror as 
men do in pain. even the madness of fright was not to them, so 
that they could break away. i feared for my dear madam mina when 
these weird figures drew near and circled round. i looked at her, 
but she sat calm, and smiled at me. when i would have stepped to 
the fire to replenish it, she caught me and held me back, and 
whispered, like a voice that one hears in a dream, so low it was. 
"no! no! do not go without. here you are safe!" 
i turned to her, and looking in her eyes said, "but you? 
it is for you that i fear!" 
whereat she laughed, a laugh low and unreal, and said, "fear 
for me! why fear for me? none safer in all the world from 
them than i am," and as i wondered at the meaning of her 
words, a puff of wind made the flame leap up, and i see the 
red scar on her forehead. then, alas! i knew. did i not, 
i would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist 
and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the holy 
circle. then they began to materialize till, if god have 
not taken away my reason, for i saw it through my eyes. 
there were before me in actual flesh the same three women 
that jonathan saw in the room, when they would have kissed 
his throat. i knew the swaying round forms, the bright 
hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddy colour, the voluptuous 
lips. they smiled ever at poor dear madam mina. and as 
their laugh came through the silence of the night, they 
twined their arms and pointed to her, and said in those so 
sweet tingling tones that jonathan said were of the intolerable 
sweetness of the water glasses, "come, sister. come to us. 
come!" 
in fear i turned to my poor madam mina, and my heart with 
gladness leapt like flame. for oh! the terror in her sweet 
eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart 
that was all of hope. god be thanked she was not, yet, of 
them. i seized some of the firewood which was by me, and 
holding out some of the wafer, advanced on them towards the 
fire. they drew back before me, and laughed their low horrid 
laugh. i fed the fire, and feared them not. for i knew that we 
were safe within the ring, which she could not leave no more than 
they could enter. the horses had ceased to moan, and lay still 
on the ground. the snow fell on them softly, and they grew 
whiter. i knew that there was for the poor beasts no more of 
terror. 
and so we remained till the red of the dawn began to fall 
through the snow gloom. i was desolate and afraid, and 
full of woe and terror. but when that beautiful sun began 
to climb the horizon life was to me again. at the first 
coming of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the whirling 
mist and snow. the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away 
towards the castle, and were lost. 
instinctively, with the dawn coming, i turned to madam mina, 
intending to hypnotize her. but she lay in a deep and sudden 
sleep, from which i could not wake her. i tried to hypnotize 
through her sleep, but she made no response, none at all, and the 
day broke. i fear yet to stir. i have made my fire and have 
seen the horses, they are all dead. today i have much to do here, 
and i keep waiting till the sun is up high. for there may be 
places where i must go, where that sunlight, though snow and mist 
obscure it, will be to me a safety. 
i will strengthen me with breakfast, and then i will do my 
terrible work. madam mina still sleeps, and god be thanked! she 
is calm in her sleep . . . 
jonathan harker's journal 
4 november, evening.-the accident to the launch has been a terrible 
thing for us. only for it we should have overtaken the boat long ago, 
and by now my dear mina would have been free. i fear to think of her, 
off on the wolds near that horrid place. we have got horses, and we 
follow on the track. i note this whilst godalming is getting ready. 
we have our arms. the szgany must look out if they mean to fight. oh, 
if only morris and seward were with us. we must only hope! if i 
write no more goodby mina! god bless and keep you. 
dr. seward's diary 
5 november.-with the dawn we saw the body of szgany before us dashing 
away from the river with their leiter wagon. they surrounded it in a 
cluster, and hurried along as though beset. the snow is falling 
lightly and there is a strange excitement in the air. it may be our 
own feelings, but the depression is strange. far off i hear the 
howling of wolves. the snow brings them down from the mountains, and 
there are dangers to all of us, and from all sides. the horses are 
nearly ready, and we are soon off. we ride to death of some one. god 
alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be . . . 
dr. van helsing's memorandum 
5 november, afternoon.-i am at least sane. thank god for 
that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been 
dreadful. when i left madam mina sleeping within the holy 
circle, i took my way to the castle. the blacksmith hammer 
which i took in the carriage from veresti was useful, though the 
doors were all open i broke them off the rusty hinges, lest some 
ill intent or ill chance should close them, so that being entered 
i might not get out. jonathan's bitter experience served me 
here. by memory of his diary i found my way to the old chapel, 
for i knew that here my work lay. the air was oppressive. it 
seemed as if there was some sulphurous fume, which at times made 
me dizzy. either there was a roaring in my ears or i heard afar 
off the howl of wolves. then i bethought me of my dear madam 
mina, and i was in terrible plight. the dilemma had me between 
his horns. 
her, i had not dare to take into this place, but left safe 
from the vampire in that holy circle. and yet even there 
would be the wolf! i resolve me that my work lay here, and 
that as to the wolves we must submit, if it were god's will. at 
any rate it was only death and freedom beyond. so did i choose 
for her. had it but been for myself the choice had been easy, 
the maw of the wolf were better to rest in than the grave of the 
vampire! so i make my choice to go on with my work. 
i knew that there were at least three graves to find, graves 
that are inhabit. so i search, and search, and i find one 
of them. she lay in her vampire sleep, so full of life and 
voluptuous beauty that i shudder as though i have come to 
do murder. ah, i doubt not that in the old time, when such 
things were, many a man who set forth to do such a task as 
mine, found at the last his heart fail him, and then his 
nerve. so he delay, and delay, and delay, till the mere 
beauty and the fascination of the wanton undead have hypnotize 
him. and he remain on and on, till sunset come, and the vampire 
sleep be over. then the beautiful eyes of the fair woman open 
and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss, and 
the man is weak. and there remain one more victim in the 
vampire fold. one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks 
of the undead! . . . 
there is some fascination, surely, when i am moved by the 
mere presence of such an one, even lying as she lay in a 
tomb fretted with age and heavy with the dust of centuries, 
though there be that horrid odour such as the lairs of the 
count have had. yes, i was moved. i, van helsing, with 
all my purpose and with my motive for hate. i was moved to 
a yearning for delay which seemed to paralyze my faculties 
and to clog my very soul. it may have been that the need 
of natural sleep, and the strange oppression of the air 
were beginning to overcome me. certain it was that i was 
lapsing into sleep, the open eyed sleep of one who yields 
to a sweet fascination, when there came through the snow-stilled 
air a long, low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke me 
like the sound of a clarion. for it was the voice of my dear 
madam mina that i heard. 
then i braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by 
wrenching away tomb tops one other of the sisters, the other dark 
one. i dared not pause to look on her as i had on her sister, 
lest once more i should begin to be enthrall. but i go on 
searching until, presently, i find in a high great tomb as if 
made to one much beloved that other fair sister which, like 
jonathan i had seen to gather herself out of the atoms of the 
mist. she was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so 
exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in me, 
which calls some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, 
made my head whirl with new emotion. but god be thanked, that 
soul wail of my dear madam mina had not died out of my ears. 
and, before the spell could be wrought further upon me, i had 
nerved myself to my wild work. by this time i had searched all 
the tombs in the chapel, so far as i could tell. and as there 
had been only three of these undead phantoms around us in the 
night, i took it that there were no more of active undead 
existent. there was one great tomb more lordly than all the 
rest. huge it was, and nobly proportioned. on it was but one 
word. 
dracula 
this then was the undead home of the king vampire, to whom 
so many more were due. its emptiness spoke eloquent to 
make certain what i knew. before i began to restore these 
women to their dead selves through my awful work, i laid in 
dracula's tomb some of the wafer, and so banished him from 
it, undead, for ever. 
then began my terrible task, and i dreaded it. had it been 
but one, it had been easy, comparative. but three! to 
begin twice more after i had been through a deed of horror. 
for it was terrible with the sweet miss lucy, what would it 
not be with these strange ones who had survived through 
centuries, and who had been strengthened by the passing of 
the years. who would, if they could, have fought for their 
foul lives . . . 
oh, my friend john, but it was butcher work. had i not 
been nerved by thoughts of other dead, and of the living 
over whom hung such a pall of fear, i could not have gone 
on. i tremble and tremble even yet, though till all was 
over, god be thanked, my nerve did stand. had i not seen 
the repose in the first place, and the gladness that stole 
over it just ere the final dissolution came, as realization 
that the soul had been won, i could not have gone further 
with my butchery. i could not have endured the horrid screeching 
as the stake drove home, the plunging of writhing form, and lips 
of bloody foam. i should have fled in terror and left my work 
undone. but it is over! and the poor souls, i can pity them now 
and weep, as i think of them placid each in her full sleep of 
death for a short moment ere fading. for, friend john, hardly 
had my knife severed the head of each, before the whole body 
began to melt away and crumble into its native dust, as though 
the death that should have come centuries ago had at last assert 
himself and say at once and loud, "i am here!" 
before i left the castle i so fixed its entrances that never 
more can the count enter there undead. 
when i stepped into the circle where madam mina slept, she 
woke from her sleep and, seeing me, cried out in pain that 
i had endured too much. 
"come!" she said, "come away from this awful place! let us 
go to meet my husband who is, i know, coming towards us." 
she was looking thin and pale and weak. but her eyes were 
pure and glowed with fervour. i was glad to see her paleness and 
her illness, for my mind was full of the fresh horror of that 
ruddy vampire sleep. 
and so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go 
eastward to meet our friends, and him, whom madam mina tell 
me that she know are coming to meet us. 
mina harker's journal 
6 november.-it was late in the afternoon when the professor and i 
took our way towards the east whence i knew jonathan was coming. we 
did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to 
take heavy rugs and wraps with us. we dared not face the possibility 
of being left without warmth in the cold and the snow. we had to take 
some of our provisions too, for we were in a perfect desolation, and 
so far as we could see through the snowfall, there was not even the 
sign of habitation. when we had gone about a mile, i was tired with 
the heavy walking and sat down to rest. then we looked back and saw 
where the clear line of dracula's castle cut the sky. for we were so 
deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective 
of the carpathian mountains was far below it. we saw it in all its 
grandeur, perched a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer precipice, 
and with seemingly a great gap between it and the steep of the 
adjacent mountain on any side. there was something wild and uncanny 
about the place. we could hear the distant howling of wolves. they 
were far off, but the sound, even though coming muffled through the 
deadening snowfall, was full of terror. i knew from the way dr. van 
helsing was searching about that he was trying to seek some strategic 
point, where we would be less exposed in case of attack. the rough 
roadway still led downwards. we could trace it through the drifted 
snow. 
in a little while the professor signalled to me, so i got up and 
joined him. he had found a wonderful spot, a sort of natural hollow 
in a rock, with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders. he 
took me by the hand and drew me in. 
"see!" he said, "here you will be in shelter. and if the wolves do 
come i can meet them one by one." 
he brought in our furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some 
provisions and forced them upon me. but i could not eat, to even try 
to do so was repulsive to me, and much as i would have liked to please 
him, i could not bring myself to the attempt. he looked very sad, but 
did not reproach me. taking his field glasses from the case, he stood 
on the top of the rock, and began to search the horizon. 
suddenly he called out, "look! madam mina, look! look!" 
i sprang up and stood beside him on the rock. he handed me his 
glasses and pointed. the snow was now falling more heavily, and 
swirled about fiercely, for a high wind was beginning to blow. 
however, there were times when there were pauses between the snow 
flurries and i could see a long way round. from the height where we 
were it was possible to see a great distance. and far off, beyond the 
white waste of snow, i could see the river lying like a black ribbon 
in kinks and curls as it wound its way. straight in front of us and 
not far off, in fact so near that i wondered we had not noticed 
before, came a group of mounted men hurrying along. in the midst of 
them was a cart, a long leiter wagon which swept from side to side, 
like a dog's tail wagging, with each stern inequality of the road. 
outlined against the snow as they were, i could see from the men's 
clothes that they were peasants or gypsies of some kind. 
on the cart was a great square chest. my heart leaped as i saw it, for 
i felt that the end was coming. the evening was now drawing close, 
and well i knew that at sunset the thing, which was till then 
imprisoned there, would take new freedom and could in any of many 
forms elude pursuit. in fear i turned to the professor. to my 
consternation, however, he was not there. an instant later, i saw him 
below me. round the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found 
shelter in last night. 
when he had completed it he stood beside me again saying, "at least 
you shall be safe here from him!" he took the glasses from me, and at 
the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us. "see," he 
said, "they come quickly. they are flogging the horses, and galloping 
as hard as they can." 
he paused and went on in a hollow voice, "they are racing for the 
sunset. we may be too late. god's will be done!" down came another 
blinding rush of driving snow, and the whole landscape was blotted 
out. it soon passed, however, and once more his glasses were fixed on 
the plain. 
then came a sudden cry, "look! look! look! see, two horsemen follow 
fast, coming up from the south. it must be quincey and john. take 
the glass. look before the snow blots it all out!" i took it and 
looked. the two men might be dr. seward and mr. morris. i knew at 
all events that neither of them was jonathan. at the same time i knew 
that jonathan was not far off. looking around i saw on the north side 
of the coming party two other men, riding at breakneck speed. one of 
them i knew was jonathan, and the other i took, of course, to be lord 
godalming. they too, were pursuing the party with the cart. when i 
told the professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and after 
looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he laid his 
winchester rifle ready for use against the boulder at the opening of 
our shelter. 
"they are all converging," he said. "when the time comes we shall have 
gypsies on all sides." i got out my revolver ready to hand, for 
whilst we were speaking the howling of wolves came louder and closer. 
when the snow storm abated a moment we looked again. it was strange 
to see the snow falling in such heavy flakes close to us, and beyond, 
the sun shining more and more brightly as it sank down towards the far 
mountain tops. sweeping the glass all around us i could see here and 
there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers. 
the wolves were gathering for their prey. 
every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. the wind came now in 
fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us 
in circling eddies. at times we could not see an arm's length before 
us. but at others, as the hollow sounding wind swept by us, it seemed 
to clear the air space around us so that we could see afar off. we 
had of late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that 
we knew with fair accuracy when it would be. and we knew that before 
long the sun would set. it was hard to believe that by our watches it 
was less than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the 
various bodies began to converge close upon us. the wind came now 
with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the 
north. it seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for with only 
occasional bursts, the snow fell. we could distinguish clearly the 
individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers. strangely 
enough those pursued did not seem to realize, or at least to care, 
that they were pursued. they seemed, however, to hasten with 
redoubled speed as the sun dropped lower and lower on the mountain 
tops. 
closer and closer they drew. the professor and i crouched down behind 
our rock, and held our weapons ready. i could see that he was 
determined that they should not pass. one and all were quite unaware 
of our presence. 
all at once two voices shouted out to "halt!" one was my jonathan's, 
raised in a high key of passion. the other mr. morris' strong 
resolute tone of quiet command. the gypsies may not have known the 
language, but there was no mistaking the tone, in whatever tongue the 
words were spoken. instinctively they reined in, and at the instant 
lord godalming and jonathan dashed up at one side and dr. seward and 
mr. morris on the other. the leader of the gypsies, a splendid 
looking fellow who sat his horse like a centaur, waved them back, and 
in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed. they 
lashed the horses which sprang forward. but the four men raised their 
winchester rifles, and in an unmistakable way commanded them to stop. 
at the same moment dr. van helsing and i rose behind the rock and 
pointed our weapons at them. seeing that they were surrounded the men 
tightened their reins and drew up. the leader turned to them and gave 
a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he 
carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack. 
issue was joined in an instant. 
the leader, with a quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out in 
front, and pointed first to the sun, now close down on the hill tops, 
and then to the castle, said something which i did not understand. 
for answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their 
horses and dashed towards the cart. i should have felt terrible fear 
at seeing jonathan in such danger, but that the ardor of battle must 
have been upon me as well as the rest of them. i felt no fear, but 
only a wild, surging desire to do something. seeing the quick 
movement of our parties, the leader of the gypsies gave a command. his 
men instantly formed round the cart in a sort of undisciplined 
endeavour, each one shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness 
to carry out the order. 
in the midst of this i could see that jonathan on one side of the ring 
of men, and quincey on the other, were forcing a way to the cart. it 
was evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun 
should set. nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder them. neither 
the levelled weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies in front, 
nor the howling of the wolves behind, appeared to even attract their 
attention. jonathan's impetuosity, and the manifest singleness of his 
purpose, seemed to overawe those in front of him. instinctively they 
cowered aside and let him pass. in an instant he had jumped upon the 
cart, and with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great 
box, and flung it over the wheel to the ground. in the meantime, mr. 
morris had had to use force to pass through his side of the ring of 
szgany. all the time i had been breathlessly watching jonathan i had, 
with the tail of my eye, seen him pressing desperately forward, and 
had seen the knives of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, 
and they cut at him. he had parried with his great bowie knife, and 
at first i thought that he too had come through in safety. but as he 
sprang beside jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart, i could 
see that with his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the 
blood was spurting through his fingers. he did not delay 
notwithstanding this, for as jonathan, with desperate energy, attacked 
one end of the chest, attempting to prize off the lid with his great 
kukri knife, he attacked the other frantically with his bowie. under 
the efforts of both men the lid began to yield. the nails drew with a 
screeching sound, and the top of the box was thrown back. 
by this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the 
winchesters, and at the mercy of lord godalming and dr. seward, had 
given in and made no further resistance. the sun was almost down on 
the mountain tops, and the shadows of the whole group fell upon the 
snow. i saw the count lying within the box upon the earth, some of 
which the rude falling from the cart had scattered over him. he was 
deathly pale, just like a waxen image, and the red eyes glared with 
the horrible vindictive look which i knew so well. 
as i looked, the eyes saw the sinking sun, and the look of hate in 
them turned to triumph. 
but, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of jonathan's great 
knife. i shrieked as i saw it shear through the throat. whilst at 
the same moment mr. morris's bowie knife plunged into the heart. 
it was like a miracle, but before our very eyes, and almost in the 
drawing of a breath, the whole body crumbled into dust and passed from 
our sight. 
i shall be glad as long as i live that even in that moment of final 
dissolution, there was in the face a look of peace, such as i never 
could have imagined might have rested there. 
the castle of dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every 
stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of 
the setting sun. 
the gypsies, taking us as in some way the cause of the extraordinary 
disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away 
as if for their lives. those who were unmounted jumped upon the 
leiter wagon and shouted to the horsemen not to desert them. the 
wolves, which had withdrawn to a safe distance, followed in their 
wake, leaving us alone. 
mr. morris, who had sunk to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding 
his hand pressed to his side. the blood still gushed through his 
fingers. i flew to him, for the holy circle did not now keep me back; 
so did the two doctors. jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man 
laid back his head on his shoulder. with a sigh he took, with a 
feeble effort, my hand in that of his own which was unstained. 
he must have seen the anguish of my heart in my face, for he smiled at 
me and said, "i am only too happy to have been of service! oh, god!" 
he cried suddenly, struggling to a sitting posture and pointing to me. 
"it was worth for this to die! look! look!" 
the sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and the red gleams 
fell upon my face, so that it was bathed in rosy light. with one 
impulse the men sank on their knees and a deep and earnest "amen" 
broke from all as their eyes followed the pointing of his finger. 
the dying man spoke, "now god be thanked that all has not been in 
vain! see! the snow is not more stainless than her forehead! the 
curse has passed away!" 
and, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a 
gallant gentleman. 
note 
seven years ago we all went through the flames. and the happiness of 
some of us since then is, we think, well worth the pain we endured. 
it is an added joy to mina and to me that our boy's birthday is the 
same day as that on which quincey morris died. his mother holds, i 
know, the secret belief that some of our brave friend's spirit has 
passed into him. his bundle of names links all our little band of men 
together. but we call him quincey. 
in the summer of this year we made a journey to transylvania, and went 
over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and 
terrible memories. it was almost impossible to believe that the 
things which we had seen with our own eyes and heard with our own ears 
were living truths. every trace of all that had been was blotted 
out. the castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of 
desolation. 
when we got home we were talking of the old time, which we could all 
look back on without despair, for godalming and seward are both 
happily married. i took the papers from the safe where they had been 
ever since our return so long ago. we were struck with the fact, that 
in all the mass of material of which the record is composed, there is 
hardly one authentic document. nothing but a mass of typewriting, 
except the later notebooks of mina and seward and myself, and van 
helsing's memorandum. we could hardly ask any one, even did we wish 
to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. van helsing summed 
it all up as he said, with our boy on his knee. 
"we want no proofs. we ask none to believe us! this boy will some 
day know what a brave and gallant woman his mother is. already he 
knows her sweetness and loving care. later on he will understand how 
some men so loved her, that they did dare much for her sake." 
jonathan harker 
*** end of the project gutenberg ebook, dracula *** 
this file should be named dracu13.txt or dracu13.zip 
corrected editions of our ebooks get a new number, dracu14.txt 
versions based on separate sources get new letter, dracu13a.txt 
project gutenberg ebooks are often created from several printed 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the us 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we usually do not 
keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition. 
we are now trying to release all our ebooks one year in advance 
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing. 
please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections, 
even years after the official publication date. 
please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til 
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement. 
the official release date of all project gutenberg ebooks is at 
midnight, central time, of the last day of the stated month. a 
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment 
and editing by those who wish to do so. 
most people start at our web sites at: 
http://gutenberg.net or 
http://promo.net/pg 
these web sites include award-winning information about project 
gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new 
ebooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!). 
those of you who want to download any ebook before announcement 
can get to them as follows, and just download by date. this is 
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the 
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an 
announcement goes out in the project gutenberg newsletter. 
http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext05 or 
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext05 
or /etext04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 
91 or 90 
just search by the first five letters of the filename you want, 
as it appears in our newsletters. 
information about project gutenberg (one page) 
we produce about two million dollars for each hour we work. the 
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours 
to get any ebook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright 
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc. our 
projected audience is one hundred million readers. if the value 
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2 
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text 
files per month: 1240 more ebooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+ 
we are already on our way to trying for 2000 more ebooks in 2002 
if they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total 
will reach over half a trillion ebooks given away by year's end. 
the goal of project gutenberg is to give away 1 trillion ebooks! 
this is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers, 
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users. 
here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated): 
ebooks year month 
1 1971 july 
10 1991 january 
100 1994 january 
1000 1997 august 
1500 1998 october 
2000 1999 december 
2500 2000 december 
3000 2001 november 
4000 2001 october/november 
6000 2002 december* 
9000 2003 november* 
10000 2004 january* 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation has been created 
to secure a future for project gutenberg into the next millennium. 
we need your donations more than ever! 
as of february, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people 
and organizations in: alabama, alaska, arkansas, connecticut, 
delaware, district of columbia, florida, georgia, hawaii, illinois, 
indiana, iowa, kansas, kentucky, louisiana, maine, massachusetts, 
michigan, mississippi, missouri, montana, nebraska, nevada, new 
hampshire, new jersey, new mexico, new york, north carolina, ohio, 
oklahoma, oregon, pennsylvania, rhode island, south carolina, south 
dakota, tennessee, texas, utah, vermont, virginia, washington, west 
virginia, wisconsin, and wyoming. 
we have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones 
that have responded. 
as the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list 
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states. 
please feel free to ask to check the status of your state. 
in answer to various questions we have received on this: 
we are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally 
request donations in all 50 states. if your state is not listed and 
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have, 
just ask. 
while we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are 
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting 
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to 
donate. 
international donations are accepted, but we don't know anything about 
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they can be made 
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are 
ways. 
donations by check or money order may be sent to: 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
809 north 1500 west 
salt lake city, ut 84116 
contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment 
method other than by check or money order. 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation has been approved by 
the us internal revenue service as a 501(c)(3) organization with ein 
[employee identification number] 64-622154. donations are 
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law. as fund-raising 
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be 
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states. 
we need your donations more than ever! 
you can get up to date donation information online at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html 
if you can't reach project gutenberg, 
you can always email directly to: 
michael s. hart <hart@pobox.com> 
prof. hart will answer or forward your message. 
we would prefer to send you information by email. 
**the legal small print** 
(three pages) 
***start**the small print!**for public domain ebooks**start*** 
why is this "small print!" statement here? you know: lawyers. 
they tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with 
your copy of this ebook, even if you got it for free from 
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our 
fault. so, among other things, this "small print!" statement 
disclaims most of our liability to you. it also tells you how 
you may distribute copies of this ebook if you want to. 
*before!* you use or read this ebook 
by using or reading any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
ebook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept 
this "small print!" statement. if you do not, you can receive 
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this ebook by 
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person 
you got it from. if you received this ebook on a physical 
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request. 
about project gutenberg-tm ebooks 
this project gutenberg-tm ebook, like most project gutenberg-tm ebooks, 
is a "public domain" work distributed by professor michael s. hart 
through the project gutenberg association (the "project"). 
among other things, this means that no one owns a united states copyright 
on or for this work, so the project (and you!) can copy and 
distribute it in the united states without permission and 
without paying copyright royalties. special rules, set forth 
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this ebook 
under the "project gutenberg" trademark. 
please do not use the "project gutenberg" trademark to market 
any commercial products without permission. 
to create these ebooks, the project expends considerable 
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain 
works. despite these efforts, the project's ebooks and any 
medium they may be on may contain "defects". among other 
things, defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged 
disk or other ebook medium, a computer virus, or computer 
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment. 
limited warranty; disclaimer of damages 
but for the "right of replacement or refund" described below, 
[1] michael hart and the foundation (and any other party you may 
receive this ebook from as a project gutenberg-tm ebook) disclaims 
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including 
legal fees, and [2] you have no remedies for negligence or 
under strict liability, or for breach of warranty or contract, 
including but not limited to indirect, consequential, punitive 
or incidental damages, even if you give notice of the 
possibility of such damages. 
if you discover a defect in this ebook within 90 days of 
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) 
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that 
time to the person you received it from. if you received it 
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and 
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement 
copy. if you received it electronically, such person may 
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to 
receive it electronically. 
this ebook is otherwise provided to you "as-is". no other 
warranties of any kind, express or implied, are made to you as 
to the ebook or any medium it may be on, including but not 
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for a 
particular purpose. 
some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or 
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the 
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you 
may have other legal rights. 
indemnity 
you will indemnify and hold michael hart, the foundation, 
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated 
with the production and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including 
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the 
following that you do or cause: [1] distribution of this ebook, 
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the ebook, 
or [3] any defect. 
distribution under "project gutenberg-tm" 
you may distribute copies of this ebook electronically, or by 
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this 
"small print!" and all other references to project gutenberg, 
or: 
[1] only give exact copies of it. among other things, this 
requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the 
ebook or this "small print!" statement. you may however, 
if you wish, distribute this ebook in machine readable 
binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form, 
including any form resulting from conversion by word 
processing or hypertext software, but only so long as 
*either*: 
[*] the ebook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and 
does *not* contain characters other than those 
intended by the author of the work, although tilde 
(~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may 
be used to convey punctuation intended by the 
author, and additional characters may be used to 
indicate hypertext links; or 
[*] the ebook may be readily converted by the reader at 
no expense into plain ascii, ebcdic or equivalent 
form by the program that displays the ebook (as is 
the case, for instance, with most word processors); 
or 
[*] you provide, or agree to also provide on request at 
no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the 
ebook in its original plain ascii form (or in ebcdic 
or other equivalent proprietary form). 
[2] honor the ebook refund and replacement provisions of this 
"small print!" statement. 
[3] pay a trademark license fee to the foundation of 20% of the 
gross profits you derive calculated using the method you 
already use to calculate your applicable taxes. if you 
don't derive profits, no royalty is due. royalties are 
payable to "project gutenberg literary archive foundation" 
the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were 
legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent 
periodic) tax return. please contact us beforehand to 
let us know your plans and to work out the details. 
what if you *want* to send money even if you don't have to? 
project gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of 
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed 
in machine readable form. 
the project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time, 
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses. 
money should be paid to the: 
"project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 
if you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or 
software or other items, please contact michael hart at: 
hart@pobox.com 
[portions of this ebook's header and trailer may be reprinted only 
when distributed free of all fees. copyright (c) 2001, 2002 by 
michael s. hart. project gutenberg is a trademark and may not be 
used in any sales of project gutenberg ebooks or other materials be 
they hardware or software or any other related product without 
express permission.] 
*end the small print! for public domain ebooks*ver.02/11/02*end* 
*the project gutenberg etext of great expectations, by dickens* 
#38 in our series by charles dickens 
copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check 
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!! 
please take a look at the important information in this header. 
we encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an 
electronic path open for the next readers. do not remove this. 
**welcome to the world of free plain vanilla electronic texts** 
**etexts readable by both humans and by computers, since 1971** 
*these etexts prepared by hundreds of volunteers and donations* 
information on contacting project gutenberg to get etexts, and 
further information is included below. we need your donations. 
great expectations by charles dickens 
august, 1998 [etext #1400] 
[most recently updated: decsmber 1, 2005] 
*the project gutenberg etext of great expectations, by dickens* 
******this file should be named grexp10.txt or grexp10.zip***** 
corrected editions of our etexts get a new number, grexp11.txt 
versions based on separate sources get new letter, grexp10a.txt 
project gutenberg etexts are usually created from multiple editions, 
all of which are in the public domain in the united states, unless a 
copyright notice is included. therefore, we do not keep these books 
in compliance with any particular paper edition, usually otherwise. 
we are now trying to release all our books one month in advance 
of the official release dates, for time for better editing. 
please note: neither this list nor its contents are final till 
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement. 
the official release date of all project gutenberg etexts is at 
midnight, central time, of the last day of the stated month. a 
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment 
and editing by those who wish to do so. to be sure you have an 
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes 
in the first week of the next month. since our ftp program has 
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a 
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a 
new copy has at least one byte more or less. 
information about project gutenberg (one page) 
we produce about two million dollars for each hour we work. the 
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take 
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright 
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc. this 
projected audience is one hundred million readers. if our value 
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2 
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text 
files per month, or 384 more etexts in 1998 for a total of 1500+ 
if these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the 
total should reach over 150 billion etexts given away. 
the goal of project gutenberg is to give away one trillion etext 
files by the december 31, 2001. [10,000 x 100,000,000=trillion] 
this is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers, 
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users. 2001 
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it 
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001. 
we need your donations more than ever! 
all donations should be made to "project gutenberg/cmu": and are 
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (cmu = carnegie- 
mellon university). 
for these and other matters, please mail to: 
project gutenberg 
p. o. box 2782 
champaign, il 61825 
when all other email fails try our executive director: 
michael s. hart <hart@pobox.com> 
we would prefer to send you this information by email 
(internet, bitnet, compuserve, attmail or mcimail). 
if you have an ftp program (or emulator), please 
ftp directly to the project gutenberg archives: 
[mac users, do not point and click. . .type] 
ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu 
login: anonymous 
password: your@login 
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96 
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information] 
dir [to see files] 
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files] 
get index?00.gut 
for a list of books 
and 
get new gut for general information 
and 
mget gut* for newsletters. 
**information prepared by the project gutenberg legal advisor** 
(three pages) 
***start**the small print!**for public domain etexts**start*** 
why is this "small print!" statement here? you know: lawyers. 
they tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with 
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from 
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our 
fault. so, among other things, this "small print!" statement 
disclaims most of our liability to you. it also tells you how 
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to. 
*before!* you use or read this etext 
by using or reading any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept 
this "small print!" statement. if you do not, you can receive 
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by 
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person 
you got it from. if you received this etext on a physical 
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request. 
about project gutenberg-tm etexts 
this project gutenberg-tm etext, like most project gutenberg- 
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by professor 
michael s. hart through the project gutenberg association at 
carnegie-mellon university (the "project"). among other 
things, this means that no one owns a united states copyright 
on or for this work, so the project (and you!) can copy and 
distribute it in the united states without permission and 
without paying copyright royalties. special rules, set forth 
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext 
under the project's "project gutenberg" trademark. 
to create these etexts, the project expends considerable 
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain 
works. despite these efforts, the project's etexts and any 
medium they may be on may contain "defects". among other 
things, defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged 
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer 
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment. 
limited warranty; disclaimer of damages 
but for the "right of replacement or refund" described below, 
[1] the project (and any other party you may receive this 
etext from as a project gutenberg-tm etext) disclaims all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including 
legal fees, and [2] you have no remedies for negligence or 
under strict liability, or for breach of warranty or contract, 
including but not limited to indirect, consequential, punitive 
or incidental damages, even if you give notice of the 
possibility of such damages. 
if you discover a defect in this etext within 90 days of 
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) 
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that 
time to the person you received it from. if you received it 
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and 
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement 
copy. if you received it electronically, such person may 
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to 
receive it electronically. 
this etext is otherwise provided to you "as-is". no other 
warranties of any kind, express or implied, are made to you as 
to the etext or any medium it may be on, including but not 
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for a 
particular purpose. 
some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or 
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the 
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you 
may have other legal rights. 
indemnity 
you will indemnify and hold the project, its directors, 
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost 
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or 
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause: 
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification, 
or addition to the etext, or [3] any defect. 
distribution under "project gutenberg-tm" 
you may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by 
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this 
"small print!" and all other references to project gutenberg, 
or: 
[1] only give exact copies of it. among other things, this 
requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the 
etext or this "small print!" statement. you may however, 
if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable 
binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form, 
including any form resulting from conversion by word pro- 
cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as 
*either*: 
[*] the etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and 
does *not* contain characters other than those 
intended by the author of the work, although tilde 
(~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may 
be used to convey punctuation intended by the 
author, and additional characters may be used to 
indicate hypertext links; or 
[*] the etext may be readily converted by the reader at 
no expense into plain ascii, ebcdic or equivalent 
form by the program that displays the etext (as is 
the case, for instance, with most word processors); 
or 
[*] you provide, or agree to also provide on request at 
no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the 
etext in its original plain ascii form (or in ebcdic 
or other equivalent proprietary form). 
[2] honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this 
"small print!" statement. 
[3] pay a trademark license fee to the project of 20% of the 
net profits you derive calculated using the method you 
already use to calculate your applicable taxes. if you 
don't derive profits, no royalty is due. royalties are 
payable to "project gutenberg association/carnegie-mellon 
university" within the 60 days following each 
date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare) 
your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return. 
what if you *want* to send money even if you don't have to? 
the project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time, 
scanning machines, ocr software, public domain etexts, royalty 
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution 
you can think of. money should be paid to "project gutenberg 
association / carnegie-mellon university". 
*end*the small print! for public domain etexts*ver.04.29.93*end* 
great expectations 
by 
charles dickens 
chapter 1 
my father's family name being pirrip, and my christian name philip, 
my infant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or more 
explicit than pip. so, i called myself pip, and came to be called 
pip. 
i give pirrip as my father's family name, on the authority of his 
tombstone and my sister - mrs. joe gargery, who married the 
blacksmith. as i never saw my father or my mother, and never saw 
any likeness of either of them (for their days were long before the 
days of photographs), my first fancies regarding what they were 
like, were unreasonably derived from their tombstones. the shape of 
the letters on my father's, gave me an odd idea that he was a 
square, stout, dark man, with curly black hair. from the character 
and turn of the inscription, "also georgiana wife of the above," i 
drew a childish conclusion that my mother was freckled and sickly. 
to five little stone lozenges, each about a foot and a half long, 
which were arranged in a neat row beside their grave, and were 
sacred to the memory of five little brothers of mine - who gave up 
trying to get a living, exceedingly early in that universal 
struggle - i am indebted for a belief i religiously entertained 
that they had all been born on their backs with their hands in 
their trousers-pockets, and had never taken them out in this state 
of existence. 
ours was the marsh country, down by the river, within, as the river 
wound, twenty miles of the sea. my first most vivid and broad 
impression of the identity of things, seems to me to have been 
gained on a memorable raw afternoon towards evening. at such a time 
i found out for certain, that this bleak place overgrown with 
nettles was the churchyard; and that philip pirrip, late of this 
parish, and also georgiana wife of the above, were dead and buried; 
and that alexander, bartholomew, abraham, tobias, and roger, infant 
children of the aforesaid, were also dead and buried; and that the 
dark flat wilderness beyond the churchyard, intersected with dykes 
and mounds and gates, with scattered cattle feeding on it, was the 
marshes; and that the low leaden line beyond, was the river; and 
that the distant savage lair from which the wind was rushing, was 
the sea; and that the small bundle of shivers growing afraid of it 
all and beginning to cry, was pip. 
"hold your noise!" cried a terrible voice, as a man started up from 
among the graves at the side of the church porch. "keep still, you 
little devil, or i'll cut your throat!" 
a fearful man, all in coarse grey, with a great iron on his leg. a 
man with no hat, and with broken shoes, and with an old rag tied 
round his head. a man who had been soaked in water, and smothered 
in mud, and lamed by stones, and cut by flints, and stung by 
nettles, and torn by briars; who limped, and shivered, and glared 
and growled; and whose teeth chattered in his head as he seized me 
by the chin. 
"o! don't cut my throat, sir," i pleaded in terror. "pray don't do 
it, sir." 
"tell us your name!" said the man. "quick!" 
"pip, sir." 
"once more," said the man, staring at me. "give it mouth!" 
"pip. pip, sir." 
"show us where you live," said the man. "pint out the place!" 
i pointed to where our village lay, on the flat in-shore among the 
alder-trees and pollards, a mile or more from the church. 
the man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me upside down, 
and emptied my pockets. there was nothing in them but a piece of 
bread. when the church came to itself - for he was so sudden and 
strong that he made it go head over heels before me, and i saw the 
steeple under my feet - when the church came to itself, i say, i 
was seated on a high tombstone, trembling, while he ate the bread 
ravenously. 
"you young dog," said the man, licking his lips, "what fat cheeks 
you ha' got." 
i believe they were fat, though i was at that time undersized for 
my years, and not strong. 
"darn me if i couldn't eat em," said the man, with a threatening 
shake of his head, "and if i han't half a mind to't!" 
i earnestly expressed my hope that he wouldn't, and held tighter to 
the tombstone on which he had put me; partly, to keep myself upon 
it; partly, to keep myself from crying. 
"now lookee here!" said the man. "where's your mother?" 
"there, sir!" said i. 
he started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over his 
shoulder. 
"there, sir!" i timidly explained. "also georgiana. that's my 
mother." 
"oh!" said he, coming back. "and is that your father alonger your 
mother?" 
"yes, sir," said i; "him too; late of this parish." 
"ha!" he muttered then, considering. "who d'ye live with - 
supposin' you're kindly let to live, which i han't made up my mind 
about?" 
"my sister, sir - mrs. joe gargery - wife of joe gargery, the 
blacksmith, sir." 
"blacksmith, eh?" said he. and looked down at his leg. 
after darkly looking at his leg and me several times, he came 
closer to my tombstone, took me by both arms, and tilted me back as 
far as he could hold me; so that his eyes looked most powerfully 
down into mine, and mine looked most helplessly up into his. 
"now lookee here," he said, "the question being whether you're to 
be let to live. you know what a file is?" 
"yes, sir." 
"and you know what wittles is?" 
"yes, sir." 
after each question he tilted me over a little more, so as to give 
me a greater sense of helplessness and danger. 
"you get me a file." he tilted me again. "and you get me wittles." 
he tilted me again. "you bring 'em both to me." he tilted me again. 
"or i'll have your heart and liver out." he tilted me again. 
i was dreadfully frightened, and so giddy that i clung to him with 
both hands, and said, "if you would kindly please to let me keep 
upright, sir, perhaps i shouldn't be sick, and perhaps i could 
attend more." 
he gave me a most tremendous dip and roll, so that the church 
jumped over its own weather-cock. then, he held me by the arms, in 
an upright position on the top of the stone, and went on in these 
fearful terms: 
"you bring me, to-morrow morning early, that file and them wittles. 
you bring the lot to me, at that old battery over yonder. you do 
it, and you never dare to say a word or dare to make a sign 
concerning your having seen such a person as me, or any person 
sumever, and you shall be let to live. you fail, or you go from my 
words in any partickler, no matter how small it is, and your heart 
and your liver shall be tore out, roasted and ate. now, i ain't 
alone, as you may think i am. there's a young man hid with me, in 
comparison with which young man i am a angel. that young man hears 
the words i speak. that young man has a secret way pecooliar to 
himself, of getting at a boy, and at his heart, and at his liver. 
it is in wain for a boy to attempt to hide himself from that young 
man. a boy may lock his door, may be warm in bed, may tuck himself 
up, may draw the clothes over his head, may think himself 
comfortable and safe, but that young man will softly creep and 
creep his way to him and tear him open. i am a-keeping that young 
man from harming of you at the present moment, with great 
difficulty. i find it wery hard to hold that young man off of your 
inside. now, what do you say?" 
i said that i would get him the file, and i would get him what 
broken bits of food i could, and i would come to him at the 
battery, early in the morning. 
"say lord strike you dead if you don't!" said the man. 
i said so, and he took me down. 
"now," he pursued, "you remember what you've undertook, and you 
remember that young man, and you get home!" 
"goo-good night, sir," i faltered. 
"much of that!" said he, glancing about him over the cold wet flat. 
"i wish i was a frog. or a eel!" 
at the same time, he hugged his shuddering body in both his arms - 
clasping himself, as if to hold himself together - and limped 
towards the low church wall. as i saw him go, picking his way among 
the nettles, and among the brambles that bound the green mounds, he 
looked in my young eyes as if he were eluding the hands of the dead 
people, stretching up cautiously out of their graves, to get a 
twist upon his ankle and pull him in. 
when he came to the low church wall, he got over it, like a man 
whose legs were numbed and stiff, and then turned round to look for 
me. when i saw him turning, i set my face towards home, and made 
the best use of my legs. but presently i looked over my shoulder, 
and saw him going on again towards the river, still hugging himself 
in both arms, and picking his way with his sore feet among the 
great stones dropped into the marshes here and there, for 
stepping-places when the rains were heavy, or the tide was in. 
the marshes were just a long black horizontal line then, as i 
stopped to look after him; and the river was just another 
horizontal line, not nearly so broad nor yet so black; and the sky 
was just a row of long angry red lines and dense black lines 
intermixed. on the edge of the river i could faintly make out the 
only two black things in all the prospect that seemed to be 
standing upright; one of these was the beacon by which the sailors 
steered - like an unhooped cask upon a pole - an ugly thing when 
you were near it; the other a gibbet, with some chains hanging to 
it which had once held a pirate. the man was limping on towards 
this latter, as if he were the pirate come to life, and come down, 
and going back to hook himself up again. it gave me a terrible turn 
when i thought so; and as i saw the cattle lifting their heads to 
gaze after him, i wondered whether they thought so too. i looked 
all round for the horrible young man, and could see no signs of 
him. but, now i was frightened again, and ran home without 
stopping. 
chapter 2 
my sister, mrs. joe gargery, was more than twenty years older than 
i, and had established a great reputation with herself and the 
neighbours because she had brought me up "by hand." having at that 
time to find out for myself what the expression meant, and knowing 
her to have a hard and heavy hand, and to be much in the habit of 
laying it upon her husband as well as upon me, i supposed that joe 
gargery and i were both brought up by hand. 
she was not a good-looking woman, my sister; and i had a general 
impression that she must have made joe gargery marry her by hand. 
joe was a fair man, with curls of flaxen hair on each side of his 
smooth face, and with eyes of such a very undecided blue that they 
seemed to have somehow got mixed with their own whites. he was a 
mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear 
fellow - a sort of hercules in strength, and also in weakness. 
my sister, mrs. joe, with black hair and eyes, had such a prevailing 
redness of skin that i sometimes used to wonder whether it was 
possible she washed herself with a nutmeg-grater instead of soap. 
she was tall and bony, and almost always wore a coarse apron, 
fastened over her figure behind with two loops, and having a square 
impregnable bib in front, that was stuck full of pins and needles. 
she made it a powerful merit in herself, and a strong reproach 
against joe, that she wore this apron so much. though i really see 
no reason why she should have worn it at all: or why, if she did 
wear it at all, she should not have taken it off, every day of her 
life. 
joe's forge adjoined our house, which was a wooden house, as many 
of the dwellings in our country were - most of them, at that time. 
when i ran home from the churchyard, the forge was shut up, and joe 
was sitting alone in the kitchen. joe and i being fellow-sufferers, 
and having confidences as such, joe imparted a confidence to me, 
the moment i raised the latch of the door and peeped in at him 
opposite to it, sitting in the chimney corner. 
"mrs. joe has been out a dozen times, looking for you, pip. and 
she's out now, making it a baker's dozen." 
"is she?" 
"yes, pip," said joe; "and what's worse, she's got tickler with 
her." 
at this dismal intelligence, i twisted the only button on my 
waistcoat round and round, and looked in great depression at the 
fire. tickler was a wax-ended piece of cane, worn smooth by 
collision with my tickled frame. 
"she sot down," said joe, "and she got up, and she made a grab at 
tickler, and she ram-paged out. that's what she did," said joe, 
slowly clearing the fire between the lower bars with the poker, and 
looking at it: "she ram-paged out, pip." 
"has she been gone long, joe?" i always treated him as a larger 
species of child, and as no more than my equal. 
"well," said joe, glancing up at the dutch clock, "she's been on 
the ram-page, this last spell, about five minutes, pip. she's a- 
coming! get behind the door, old chap, and have the jack-towel 
betwixt you." 
i took the advice. my sister, mrs. joe, throwing the door wide open, 
and finding an obstruction behind it, immediately divined the 
cause, and applied tickler to its further investigation. she 
concluded by throwing me - i often served as a connubial missile - 
at joe, who, glad to get hold of me on any terms, passed me on into 
the chimney and quietly fenced me up there with his great leg. 
"where have you been, you young monkey?" said mrs. joe, stamping her 
foot. "tell me directly what you've been doing to wear me away with 
fret and fright and worrit, or i'd have you out of that corner if 
you was fifty pips, and he was five hundred gargerys." 
"i have only been to the churchyard," said i, from my stool, crying 
and rubbing myself. 
"churchyard!" repeated my sister. "if it warn't for me you'd have 
been to the churchyard long ago, and stayed there. who brought you 
up by hand?" 
"you did," said i. 
"and why did i do it, i should like to know?" exclaimed my sister. 
i whimpered, "i don't know." 
"i don't!" said my sister. "i'd never do it again! i know that. i 
may truly say i've never had this apron of mine off, since born you 
were. it's bad enough to be a blacksmith's wife (and him a gargery) 
without being your mother." 
my thoughts strayed from that question as i looked disconsolately 
at the fire. for, the fugitive out on the marshes with the ironed 
leg, the mysterious young man, the file, the food, and the dreadful 
pledge i was under to commit a larceny on those sheltering 
premises, rose before me in the avenging coals. 
"hah!" said mrs. joe, restoring tickler to his station. "churchyard, 
indeed! you may well say churchyard, you two." one of us, 
by-the-bye, had not said it at all. "you'll drive me to the 
churchyard betwixt you, one of these days, and oh, a pr-r-recious 
pair you'd be without me!" 
as she applied herself to set the tea-things, joe peeped down at me 
over his leg, as if he were mentally casting me and himself up, and 
calculating what kind of pair we practically should make, under the 
grievous circumstances foreshadowed. after that, he sat feeling his 
right-side flaxen curls and whisker, and following mrs. joe about 
with his blue eyes, as his manner always was at squally times. 
my sister had a trenchant way of cutting our bread-and-butter for 
us, that never varied. first, with her left hand she jammed the 
loaf hard and fast against her bib - where it sometimes got a pin 
into it, and sometimes a needle, which we afterwards got into our 
mouths. then she took some butter (not too much) on a knife and 
spread it on the loaf, in an apothecary kind of way, as if she were 
making a plaister - using both sides of the knife with a slapping 
dexterity, and trimming and moulding the butter off round the 
crust. then, she gave the knife a final smart wipe on the edge of 
the plaister, and then sawed a very thick round off the loaf: which 
she finally, before separating from the loaf, hewed into two 
halves, of which joe got one, and i the other. 
on the present occasion, though i was hungry, i dared not eat my 
slice. i felt that i must have something in reserve for my dreadful 
acquaintance, and his ally the still more dreadful young man. i 
knew mrs. joe's housekeeping to be of the strictest kind, and that 
my larcenous researches might find nothing available in the safe. 
therefore i resolved to put my hunk of bread-and-butter down the 
leg of my trousers. 
the effort of resolution necessary to the achievement of this 
purpose, i found to be quite awful. it was as if i had to make up 
my mind to leap from the top of a high house, or plunge into a 
great depth of water. and it was made the more difficult by the 
unconscious joe. in our already-mentioned freemasonry as 
fellow-sufferers, and in his good-natured companionship with me, it 
was our evening habit to compare the way we bit through our slices, 
by silently holding them up to each other's admiration now and then 
which stimulated us to new exertions. to-night, joe several times 
invited me, by the display of his fast-diminishing slice, to enter 
upon our usual friendly competition; but he found me, each time, 
with my yellow mug of tea on one knee, and my untouched 
bread-and-butter on the other. at last, i desperately considered 
that the thing i contemplated must be done, and that it had best be 
done in the least improbable manner consistent with the 
circumstances. i took advantage of a moment when joe had just 
looked at me, and got my bread-and-butter down my leg. 
joe was evidently made uncomfortable by what he supposed to be my 
loss of appetite, and took a thoughtful bite out of his slice, 
which he didn't seem to enjoy. he turned it about in his mouth much 
longer than usual, pondering over it a good deal, and after all 
gulped it down like a pill. he was about to take another bite, and 
had just got his head on one side for a good purchase on it, when 
his eye fell on me, and he saw that my bread-and-butter was gone. 
the wonder and consternation with which joe stopped on the 
threshold of his bite and stared at me, were too evident to escape 
my sister's observation. 
"what's the matter now?" said she, smartly, as she put down her 
cup. 
"i say, you know!" muttered joe, shaking his head at me in very 
serious remonstrance. "pip, old chap! you'll do yourself a 
mischief. it'll stick somewhere. you can't have chawed it, pip." 
"what's the matter now?" repeated my sister, more sharply than 
before. 
"if you can cough any trifle on it up, pip, i'd recommend you to do 
it," said joe, all aghast. "manners is manners, but still your 
elth's your elth." 
by this time, my sister was quite desperate, so she pounced on joe, 
and, taking him by the two whiskers, knocked his head for a little 
while against the wall behind him: while i sat in the corner, 
looking guiltily on. 
"now, perhaps you'll mention what's the matter," said my sister, 
out of breath, "you staring great stuck pig." 
joe looked at her in a helpless way; then took a helpless bite, and 
looked at me again. 
"you know, pip," said joe, solemnly, with his last bite in his 
cheek and speaking in a confidential voice, as if we two were quite 
alone, "you and me is always friends, and i'd be the last to tell 
upon you, any time. but such a-" he moved his chair and looked 
about the floor between us, and then again at me - "such a most 
oncommon bolt as that!" 
"been bolting his food, has he?" cried my sister. 
"you know, old chap," said joe, looking at me, and not at mrs. joe, 
with his bite still in his cheek, "i bolted, myself, when i was 
your age - frequent - and as a boy i've been among a many bolters; 
but i never see your bolting equal yet, pip, and it's a mercy you 
ain't bolted dead." 
my sister made a dive at me, and fished me up by the hair: saying 
nothing more than the awful words, "you come along and be dosed." 
some medical beast had revived tar-water in those days as a fine 
medicine, and mrs. joe always kept a supply of it in the cupboard; 
having a belief in its virtues correspondent to its nastiness. at 
the best of times, so much of this elixir was administered to me as 
a choice restorative, that i was conscious of going about, smelling 
like a new fence. on this particular evening the urgency of my case 
demanded a pint of this mixture, which was poured down my throat, 
for my greater comfort, while mrs. joe held my head under her arm, 
as a boot would be held in a boot-jack. joe got off with half a 
pint; but was made to swallow that (much to his disturbance, as he 
sat slowly munching and meditating before the fire), "because he had 
had a turn." judging from myself, i should say he certainly had a 
turn afterwards, if he had had none before. 
conscience is a dreadful thing when it accuses man or boy; but 
when, in the case of a boy, that secret burden co-operates with 
another secret burden down the leg of his trousers, it is (as i can 
testify) a great punishment. the guilty knowledge that i was going 
to rob mrs. joe - i never thought i was going to rob joe, for i 
never thought of any of the housekeeping property as his - united 
to the necessity of always keeping one hand on my bread-and-butter 
as i sat, or when i was ordered about the kitchen on any small 
errand, almost drove me out of my mind. then, as the marsh winds 
made the fire glow and flare, i thought i heard the voice outside, 
of the man with the iron on his leg who had sworn me to secrecy, 
declaring that he couldn't and wouldn't starve until to-morrow, but 
must be fed now. at other times, i thought, what if the young man 
who was with so much difficulty restrained from imbruing his hands 
in me, should yield to a constitutional impatience, or should 
mistake the time, and should think himself accredited to my heart 
and liver to-night, instead of to-morrow! if ever anybody's hair 
stood on end with terror, mine must have done so then. but, 
perhaps, nobody's ever did? 
it was christmas eve, and i had to stir the pudding for next day, 
with a copper-stick, from seven to eight by the dutch clock. i 
tried it with the load upon my leg (and that made me think afresh 
of the man with the load on his leg), and found the tendency of 
exercise to bring the bread-and-butter out at my ankle, quite 
unmanageable. happily, i slipped away, and deposited that part of 
my conscience in my garret bedroom. 
"hark!" said i, when i had done my stirring, and was taking a final 
warm in the chimney corner before being sent up to bed; "was that 
great guns, joe?" 
"ah!" said joe. "there's another conwict off." 
"what does that mean, joe?" said i. 
mrs. joe, who always took explanations upon herself, said, 
snappishly, "escaped. escaped." administering the definition like 
tar-water. 
while mrs. joe sat with her head bending over her needlework, i put 
my mouth into the forms of saying to joe, "what's a convict?" joe 
put his mouth into the forms of returning such a highly elaborate 
answer, that i could make out nothing of it but the single word 
"pip." 
"there was a conwict off last night," said joe, aloud, "after 
sun-set-gun. and they fired warning of him. and now, it appears 
they're firing warning of another." 
"who's firing?" said i. 
"drat that boy," interposed my sister, frowning at me over her 
work, "what a questioner he is. ask no questions, and you'll be 
told no lies." 
it was not very polite to herself, i thought, to imply that i should 
be told lies by her, even if i did ask questions. but she never was 
polite, unless there was company. 
at this point, joe greatly augmented my curiosity by taking the 
utmost pains to open his mouth very wide, and to put it into the 
form of a word that looked to me like "sulks." therefore, i 
naturally pointed to mrs. joe, and put my mouth into the form of 
saying "her?" but joe wouldn't hear of that, at all, and again 
opened his mouth very wide, and shook the form of a most emphatic 
word out of it. but i could make nothing of the word. 
"mrs. joe," said i, as a last resort, "i should like to know - if 
you wouldn't much mind - where the firing comes from?" 
"lord bless the boy!" exclaimed my sister, as if she didn't quite 
mean that, but rather the contrary. "from the hulks!" 
"oh-h!" said i, looking at joe. "hulks!" 
joe gave a reproachful cough, as much as to say, "well, i told you 
so." 
"and please what's hulks?" said i. 
"that's the way with this boy!" exclaimed my sister, pointing me 
out with her needle and thread, and shaking her head at me. "answer 
him one question, and he'll ask you a dozen directly. hulks are 
prison-ships, right 'cross th' meshes." we always used that name 
for marshes, in our country. 
"i wonder who's put into prison-ships, and why they're put there?" 
said i, in a general way, and with quiet desperation. 
it was too much for mrs. joe, who immediately rose. "i tell you 
what, young fellow," said she, "i didn't bring you up by hand to 
badger people's lives out. it would be blame to me, and not praise, 
if i had. people are put in the hulks because they murder, and 
because they rob, and forge, and do all sorts of bad; and they 
always begin by asking questions. now, you get along to bed!" 
i was never allowed a candle to light me to bed, and, as i went 
upstairs in the dark, with my head tingling - from mrs. joe's 
thimble having played the tambourine upon it, to accompany her last 
words - i felt fearfully sensible of the great convenience that the 
hulks were handy for me. i was clearly on my way there. i had begun 
by asking questions, and i was going to rob mrs. joe. 
since that time, which is far enough away now, i have often thought 
that few people know what secrecy there is in the young, under 
terror. no matter how unreasonable the terror, so that it be 
terror. i was in mortal terror of the young man who wanted my heart 
and liver; i was in mortal terror of my interlocutor with the 
ironed leg; i was in mortal terror of myself, from whom an awful 
promise had been extracted; i had no hope of deliverance through my 
all-powerful sister, who repulsed me at every turn; i am afraid to 
think of what i might have done, on requirement, in the secrecy of 
my terror. 
if i slept at all that night, it was only to imagine myself 
drifting down the river on a strong spring-tide, to the hulks; a 
ghostly pirate calling out to me through a speaking-trumpet, as i 
passed the gibbet-station, that i had better come ashore and be 
hanged there at once, and not put it off. i was afraid to sleep, 
even if i had been inclined, for i knew that at the first faint 
dawn of morning i must rob the pantry. there was no doing it in the 
night, for there was no getting a light by easy friction then; to 
have got one, i must have struck it out of flint and steel, and 
have made a noise like the very pirate himself rattling his chains. 
as soon as the great black velvet pall outside my little window was 
shot with grey, i got up and went down stairs; every board upon the 
way, and every crack in every board, calling after me, "stop 
thief!" and "get up, mrs. joe!" in the pantry, which was far more 
abundantly supplied than usual, owing to the season, i was very 
much alarmed, by a hare hanging up by the heels, whom i rather 
thought i caught, when my back was half turned, winking. i had no 
time for verification, no time for selection, no time for anything, 
for i had no time to spare. i stole some bread, some rind of 
cheese, about half a jar of mincemeat (which i tied up in my 
pocket-handkerchief with my last night's slice), some brandy from a 
stone bottle (which i decanted into a glass bottle i had secretly 
used for making that intoxicating fluid, spanish-liquorice-water, 
up in my room: diluting the stone bottle from a jug in the kitchen 
cupboard), a meat bone with very little on it, and a beautiful 
round compact pork pie. i was nearly going away without the pie, 
but i was tempted to mount upon a shelf, to look what it was that 
was put away so carefully in a covered earthen ware dish in a 
corner, and i found it was the pie, and i took it, in the hope that 
it was not intended for early use, and would not be missed for some 
time. 
there was a door in the kitchen, communicating with the forge; i 
unlocked and unbolted that door, and got a file from among joe's 
tools. then, i put the fastenings as i had found them, opened the 
door at which i had entered when i ran home last night, shut it, 
and ran for the misty marshes. 
chapter 3 
it was a rimy morning, and very damp. i had seen the damp lying on 
the outside of my little window, as if some goblin had been crying 
there all night, and using the window for a pocket-handkerchief. 
now, i saw the damp lying on the bare hedges and spare grass, like 
a coarser sort of spiders' webs; hanging itself from twig to twig 
and blade to blade. on every rail and gate, wet lay clammy; and the 
marsh-mist was so thick, that the wooden finger on the post 
directing people to our village - a direction which they never 
accepted, for they never came there - was invisible to me until i 
was quite close under it. then, as i looked up at it, while it 
dripped, it seemed to my oppressed conscience like a phantom 
devoting me to the hulks. 
the mist was heavier yet when i got out upon the marshes, so that 
instead of my running at everything, everything seemed to run at 
me. this was very disagreeable to a guilty mind. the gates and 
dykes and banks came bursting at me through the mist, as if they 
cried as plainly as could be, "a boy with somebody-else's pork pie! 
stop him!" the cattle came upon me with like suddenness, staring 
out of their eyes, and steaming out of their nostrils, "holloa, 
young thief!" one black ox, with a white cravat on - who even had 
to my awakened conscience something of a clerical air - fixed me so 
obstinately with his eyes, and moved his blunt head round in such 
an accusatory manner as i moved round, that i blubbered out to him, 
"i couldn't help it, sir! it wasn't for myself i took it!" upon 
which he put down his head, blew a cloud of smoke out of his nose, 
and vanished with a kick-up of his hind-legs and a flourish of his 
tail. 
all this time, i was getting on towards the river; but however fast 
i went, i couldn't warm my feet, to which the damp cold seemed 
riveted, as the iron was riveted to the leg of the man i was 
running to meet. i knew my way to the battery, pretty straight, for 
i had been down there on a sunday with joe, and joe, sitting on an 
old gun, had told me that when i was 'prentice to him regularly 
bound, we would have such larks there! however, in the confusion of 
the mist, i found myself at last too far to the right, and 
consequently had to try back along the river-side, on the bank of 
loose stones above the mud and the stakes that staked the tide out. 
making my way along here with all despatch, i had just crossed a 
ditch which i knew to be very near the battery, and had just 
scrambled up the mound beyond the ditch, when i saw the man sitting 
before me. his back was towards me, and he had his arms folded, and 
was nodding forward, heavy with sleep. 
i thought he would be more glad if i came upon him with his 
breakfast, in that unexpected manner, so i went forward softly and 
touched him on the shoulder. he instantly jumped up, and it was not 
the same man, but another man! 
and yet this man was dressed in coarse grey, too, and had a great 
iron on his leg, and was lame, and hoarse, and cold, and was 
everything that the other man was; except that he had not the same 
face, and had a flat broad-brimmed low-crowned felt that on. all 
this, i saw in a moment, for i had only a moment to see it in: he 
swore an oath at me, made a hit at me - it was a round weak blow 
that missed me and almost knocked himself down, for it made him 
stumble - and then he ran into the mist, stumbling twice as he went, 
and i lost him. 
"it's the young man!" i thought, feeling my heart shoot as i 
identified him. i dare say i should have felt a pain in my liver, 
too, if i had known where it was. 
i was soon at the battery, after that, and there was the right 
man-hugging himself and limping to and fro, as if he had never all 
night left off hugging and limping - waiting for me. he was awfully 
cold, to be sure. i half expected to see him drop down before my 
face and die of deadly cold. his eyes looked so awfully hungry, 
too, that when i handed him the file and he laid it down on the 
grass, it occurred to me he would have tried to eat it, if he had 
not seen my bundle. he did not turn me upside down, this time, to 
get at what i had, but left me right side upwards while i opened 
the bundle and emptied my pockets. 
"what's in the bottle, boy?" said he. 
"brandy," said i. 
he was already handing mincemeat down his throat in the most 
curious manner - more like a man who was putting it away somewhere 
in a violent hurry, than a man who was eating it - but he left off 
to take some of the liquor. he shivered all the while, so 
violently, that it was quite as much as he could do to keep the 
neck of the bottle between his teeth, without biting it off. 
"i think you have got the ague," said i. 
"i'm much of your opinion, boy," said he. 
"it's bad about here," i told him. "you've been lying out on the 
meshes, and they're dreadful aguish. rheumatic too." 
"i'll eat my breakfast afore they're the death of me," said he. 
"i'd do that, if i was going to be strung up to that there gallows 
as there is over there, directly afterwards. i'll beat the shivers 
so far, i'll bet you." 
he was gobbling mincemeat, meatbone, bread, cheese, and pork pie, 
all at once: staring distrustfully while he did so at the mist all 
round us, and often stopping - even stopping his jaws - to listen. 
some real or fancied sound, some clink upon the river or breathing 
of beast upon the marsh, now gave him a start, and he said, 
suddenly: 
"you're not a deceiving imp? you brought no one with you?" 
"no, sir! no!" 
"nor giv' no one the office to follow you?" 
"no!" 
"well," said he, "i believe you. you'd be but a fierce young hound 
indeed, if at your time of life you could help to hunt a wretched 
warmint, hunted as near death and dunghill as this poor wretched 
warmint is!" 
something clicked in his throat, as if he had works in him like a 
clock, and was going to strike. and he smeared his ragged rough 
sleeve over his eyes. 
pitying his desolation, and watching him as he gradually settled 
down upon the pie, i made bold to say, "i am glad you enjoy it." 
"did you speak?" 
"i said i was glad you enjoyed it." 
"thankee, my boy. i do." 
i had often watched a large dog of ours eating his food; and i now 
noticed a decided similarity between the dog's way of eating, and 
the man's. the man took strong sharp sudden bites, just like the 
dog. he swallowed, or rather snapped up, every mouthful, too soon 
and too fast; and he looked sideways here and there while he ate, 
as if he thought there was danger in every direction, of somebody's 
coming to take the pie away. he was altogether too unsettled in his 
mind over it, to appreciate it comfortably, i thought, or to have 
anybody to dine with him, without making a chop with his jaws at 
the visitor. in all of which particulars he was very like the dog. 
"i am afraid you won't leave any of it for him," said i, timidly; 
after a silence during which i had hesitated as to the politeness 
of making the remark. "there's no more to be got where that came 
from." it was the certainty of this fact that impelled me to offer 
the hint. 
"leave any for him? who's him?" said my friend, stopping in his 
crunching of pie-crust. 
"the young man. that you spoke of. that was hid with you." 
"oh ah!" he returned, with something like a gruff laugh. "him? yes, 
yes! he don't want no wittles." 
"i thought he looked as if he did," said i. 
the man stopped eating, and regarded me with the keenest scrutiny 
and the greatest surprise. 
"looked? when?" 
"just now." 
"where?" 
"yonder," said i, pointing; "over there, where i found him nodding 
asleep, and thought it was you." 
he held me by the collar and stared at me so, that i began to think 
his first idea about cutting my throat had revived. 
"dressed like you, you know, only with a hat," i explained, 
trembling; "and - and" - i was very anxious to put this delicately 
"and with - the same reason for wanting to borrow a file. didn't 
you hear the cannon last night?" 
"then, there was firing!" he said to himself. 
"i wonder you shouldn't have been sure of that," i returned, "for 
we heard it up at home, and that's further away, and we were shut 
in besides." 
"why, see now!" said he. "when a man's alone on these flats, with a 
light head and a light stomach, perishing of cold and want, he 
hears nothin' all night, but guns firing, and voices calling. 
hears? he sees the soldiers, with their red coats lighted up by the 
torches carried afore, closing in round him. hears his number 
called, hears himself challenged, hears the rattle of the muskets, 
hears the orders 'make ready! present! cover him steady, men!' and 
is laid hands on - and there's nothin'! why, if i see one pursuing 
party last night - coming up in order, damn 'em, with their tramp, 
tramp - i see a hundred. and as to firing! why, i see the mist 
shake with the cannon, arter it was broad day - but this man;" he 
had said all the rest, as if he had forgotten my being there; "did 
you notice anything in him?" 
"he had a badly bruised face," said i, recalling what i hardly knew 
i knew. 
"not here?" exclaimed the man, striking his left cheek mercilessly, 
with the flat of his hand. 
"yes, there!" 
"where is he?" he crammed what little food was left, into the 
breast of his grey jacket. "show me the way he went. i'll pull him 
down, like a bloodhound. curse this iron on my sore leg! give us 
hold of the file, boy." 
i indicated in what direction the mist had shrouded the other man, 
and he looked up at it for an instant. but he was down on the rank 
wet grass, filing at his iron like a madman, and not minding me or 
minding his own leg, which had an old chafe upon it and was bloody, 
but which he handled as roughly as if it had no more feeling in it 
than the file. i was very much afraid of him again, now that he had 
worked himself into this fierce hurry, and i was likewise very much 
afraid of keeping away from home any longer. i told him i must go, 
but he took no notice, so i thought the best thing i could do was 
to slip off. the last i saw of him, his head was bent over his knee 
and he was working hard at his fetter, muttering impatient 
imprecations at it and at his leg. the last i heard of him, i 
stopped in the mist to listen, and the file was still going. 
chapter 4 
i fully expected to find a constable in the kitchen, waiting to 
take me up. but not only was there no constable there, but no 
discovery had yet been made of the robbery. mrs. joe was 
prodigiously busy in getting the house ready for the festivities of 
the day, and joe had been put upon the kitchen door-step to keep 
him out of the dust-pan - an article into which his destiny always 
led him sooner or later, when my sister was vigorously reaping the 
floors of her establishment. 
"and where the deuce ha' you been?" was mrs. joe's christmas 
salutation, when i and my conscience showed ourselves. 
i said i had been down to hear the carols. "ah! well!" observed mrs. 
joe. "you might ha' done worse." not a doubt of that, i thought. 
"perhaps if i warn't a blacksmith's wife, and (what's the same 
thing) a slave with her apron never off, i should have been to hear 
the carols," said mrs. joe. "i'm rather partial to carols, myself, 
and that's the best of reasons for my never hearing any." 
joe, who had ventured into the kitchen after me as the dust-pan had 
retired before us, drew the back of his hand across his nose with a 
conciliatory air when mrs. joe darted a look at him, and, when her 
eyes were withdrawn, secretly crossed his two forefingers, and 
exhibited them to me, as our token that mrs. joe was in a cross 
temper. this was so much her normal state, that joe and i would 
often, for weeks together, be, as to our fingers, like monumental 
crusaders as to their legs. 
we were to have a superb dinner, consisting of a leg of pickled 
pork and greens, and a pair of roast stuffed fowls. a handsome 
mince-pie had been made yesterday morning (which accounted for the 
mincemeat not being missed), and the pudding was already on the 
boil. these extensive arrangements occasioned us to be cut off 
unceremoniously in respect of breakfast; "for i an't," said mrs. 
joe, "i an't a-going to have no formal cramming and busting and 
washing up now, with what i've got before me, i promise you!" 
so, we had our slices served out, as if we were two thousand troops 
on a forced march instead of a man and boy at home; and we took 
gulps of milk and water, with apologetic countenances, from a jug 
on the dresser. in the meantime, mrs. joe put clean white curtains 
up, and tacked a new flowered-flounce across the wide chimney to 
replace the old one, and uncovered the little state parlour across 
the passage, which was never uncovered at any other time, but 
passed the rest of the year in a cool haze of silver paper, which 
even extended to the four little white crockery poodles on the 
mantelshelf, each with a black nose and a basket of flowers in his 
mouth, and each the counterpart of the other. mrs. joe was a very 
clean housekeeper, but had an exquisite art of making her 
cleanliness more uncomfortable and unacceptable than dirt itself. 
cleanliness is next to godliness, and some people do the same by 
their religion. 
my sister having so much to do, was going to church vicariously; 
that is to say, joe and i were going. in his working clothes, joe 
was a well-knit characteristic-looking blacksmith; in his holiday 
clothes, he was more like a scarecrow in good circumstances, than 
anything else. nothing that he wore then, fitted him or seemed to 
belong to him; and everything that he wore then, grazed him. on the 
present festive occasion he emerged from his room, when the blithe 
bells were going, the picture of misery, in a full suit of sunday 
penitentials. as to me, i think my sister must have had some 
general idea that i was a young offender whom an accoucheur 
policemen had taken up (on my birthday) and delivered over to her, 
to be dealt with according to the outraged majesty of the law. i 
was always treated as if i had insisted on being born, in 
opposition to the dictates of reason, religion, and morality, and 
against the dissuading arguments of my best friends. even when i 
was taken to have a new suit of clothes, the tailor had orders to 
make them like a kind of reformatory, and on no account to let me 
have the free use of my limbs. 
joe and i going to church, therefore, must have been a moving 
spectacle for compassionate minds. yet, what i suffered outside, 
was nothing to what i underwent within. the terrors that had 
assailed me whenever mrs. joe had gone near the pantry, or out of 
the room, were only to be equalled by the remorse with which my 
mind dwelt on what my hands had done. under the weight of my wicked 
secret, i pondered whether the church would be powerful enough to 
shield me from the vengeance of the terrible young man, if i 
divulged to that establishment. i conceived the idea that the time 
when the banns were read and when the clergyman said, "ye are now 
to declare it!" would be the time for me to rise and propose a 
private conference in the vestry. i am far from being sure that i 
might not have astonished our small congregation by resorting to 
this extreme measure, but for its being christmas day and no 
sunday. 
mr. wopsle, the clerk at church, was to dine with us; and mr. hubble 
the wheelwright and mrs. hubble; and uncle pumblechook (joe's uncle, 
but mrs. joe appropriated him), who was a well-to-do corn-chandler 
in the nearest town, and drove his own chaise-cart. the dinner hour 
was half-past one. when joe and i got home, we found the table 
laid, and mrs. joe dressed, and the dinner dressing, and the front 
door unlocked (it never was at any other time) for the company to 
enter by, and everything most splendid. and still, not a word of 
the robbery. 
the time came, without bringing with it any relief to my feelings, 
and the company came. mr. wopsle, united to a roman nose and a 
large shining bald forehead, had a deep voice which he was 
uncommonly proud of; indeed it was understood among his 
acquaintance that if you could only give him his head, he would 
read the clergyman into fits; he himself confessed that if the 
church was "thrown open," meaning to competition, he would not 
despair of making his mark in it. the church not being "thrown 
open," he was, as i have said, our clerk. but he punished the 
amens tremendously; and when he gave out the psalm - always giving 
the whole verse - he looked all round the congregation first, as 
much as to say, "you have heard my friend overhead; oblige me with 
your opinion of this style!" 
i opened the door to the company - making believe that it was a 
habit of ours to open that door - and i opened it first to mr. 
wopsle, next to mr. and mrs. hubble, and last of all to uncle 
pumblechook. n.b., i was not allowed to call him uncle, under the 
severest penalties. 
"mrs. joe," said uncle pumblechook: a large hard-breathing 
middle-aged slow man, with a mouth like a fish, dull staring eyes, 
and sandy hair standing upright on his head, so that he looked as 
if he had just been all but choked, and had that moment come to; 
"i have brought you, as the compliments of the season - i have 
brought you, mum, a bottle of sherry wine - and i have brought you, 
mum, a bottle of port wine." 
every christmas day he presented himself, as a profound novelty, 
with exactly the same words, and carrying the two bottles like 
dumb-bells. every christmas day, mrs. joe replied, as she now 
replied, "oh, un - cle pum - ble - chook! this is kind!" every 
christmas day, he retorted, as he now retorted, "it's no more than 
your merits. and now are you all bobbish, and how's sixpennorth of 
halfpence?" meaning me. 
we dined on these occasions in the kitchen, and adjourned, for the 
nuts and oranges and apples, to the parlour; which was a change 
very like joe's change from his working clothes to his sunday 
dress. my sister was uncommonly lively on the present occasion, and 
indeed was generally more gracious in the society of mrs. hubble 
than in other company. i remember mrs. hubble as a little curly 
sharp-edged person in sky-blue, who held a conventionally juvenile 
position, because she had married mr. hubble - i don't know at what 
remote period - when she was much younger than he. i remember mr 
hubble as a tough high-shouldered stooping old man, of a sawdusty 
fragrance, with his legs extraordinarily wide apart: so that in my 
short days i always saw some miles of open country between them 
when i met him coming up the lane. 
among this good company i should have felt myself, even if i hadn't 
robbed the pantry, in a false position. not because i was squeezed 
in at an acute angle of the table-cloth, with the table in my 
chest, and the pumblechookian elbow in my eye, nor because i was 
not allowed to speak (i didn't want to speak), nor because i was 
regaled with the scaly tips of the drumsticks of the fowls, and 
with those obscure corners of pork of which the pig, when living, 
had had the least reason to be vain. no; i should not have minded 
that, if they would only have left me alone. but they wouldn't 
leave me alone. they seemed to think the opportunity lost, if they 
failed to point the conversation at me, every now and then, and 
stick the point into me. i might have been an unfortunate little 
bull in a spanish arena, i got so smartingly touched up by these 
moral goads. 
it began the moment we sat down to dinner. mr. wopsle said grace 
with theatrical declamation - as it now appears to me, something 
like a religious cross of the ghost in hamlet with richard the 
third - and ended with the very proper aspiration that we might be 
truly grateful. upon which my sister fixed me with her eye, and 
said, in a low reproachful voice, "do you hear that? be grateful." 
"especially," said mr. pumblechook, "be grateful, boy, to them which 
brought you up by hand." 
mrs. hubble shook her head, and contemplating me with a mournful 
presentiment that i should come to no good, asked, "why is it that 
the young are never grateful?" this moral mystery seemed too much 
for the company until mr. hubble tersely solved it by saying, 
"naterally wicious." everybody then murmured "true!" and looked at 
me in a particularly unpleasant and personal manner. 
joe's station and influence were something feebler (if possible) 
when there was company, than when there was none. but he always 
aided and comforted me when he could, in some way of his own, and 
he always did so at dinner-time by giving me gravy, if there were 
any. there being plenty of gravy to-day, joe spooned into my plate, 
at this point, about half a pint. 
a little later on in the dinner, mr. wopsle reviewed the sermon with 
some severity, and intimated - in the usual hypothetical case of 
the church being "thrown open" - what kind of sermon he would have 
given them. after favouring them with some heads of that discourse, 
he remarked that he considered the subject of the day's homily, 
ill-chosen; which was the less excusable, he added, when there were 
so many subjects "going about." 
"true again," said uncle pumblechook. "you've hit it, sir! plenty of 
subjects going about, for them that know how to put salt upon their 
tails. that's what's wanted. a man needn't go far to find a 
subject, if he's ready with his salt-box." mr. pumblechook added, 
after a short interval of reflection, "look at pork alone. there's 
a subject! if you want a subject, look at pork!" 
"true, sir. many a moral for the young," returned mr. wopsle; and i 
knew he was going to lug me in, before he said it; "might be 
deduced from that text." 
("you listen to this," said my sister to me, in a severe 
parenthesis.) 
joe gave me some more gravy. 
"swine," pursued mr. wopsle, in his deepest voice, and pointing his 
fork at my blushes, as if he were mentioning my christian name; 
"swine were the companions of the prodigal. the gluttony of swine 
is put before us, as an example to the young." (i thought this 
pretty well in him who had been praising up the pork for being so 
plump and juicy.) "what is detestable in a pig, is more detestable 
in a boy." 
"or girl," suggested mr. hubble. 
"of course, or girl, mr. hubble," assented mr. wopsle, rather 
irritably, "but there is no girl present." 
"besides," said mr. pumblechook, turning sharp on me, "think what 
you've got to be grateful for. if you'd been born a squeaker-" 
"he was, if ever a child was," said my sister, most emphatically. 
joe gave me some more gravy. 
"well, but i mean a four-footed squeaker," said mr. pumblechook. "if 
you had been born such, would you have been here now? not you-" 
"unless in that form," said mr. wopsle, nodding towards the dish. 
"but i don't mean in that form, sir," returned mr. pumblechook, who 
had an objection to being interrupted; "i mean, enjoying himself 
with his elders and betters, and improving himself with their 
conversation, and rolling in the lap of luxury. would he have been 
doing that? no, he wouldn't. and what would have been your 
destination?" turning on me again. "you would have been disposed of 
for so many shillings according to the market price of the article, 
and dunstable the butcher would have come up to you as you lay in 
your straw, and he would have whipped you under his left arm, and 
with his right he would have tucked up his frock to get a penknife 
from out of his waistcoat-pocket, and he would have shed your 
blood and had your life. no bringing up by hand then. not a bit of 
it!" 
joe offered me more gravy, which i was afraid to take. 
"he was a world of trouble to you, ma'am," said mrs. hubble, 
commiserating my sister. 
"trouble?" echoed my sister; "trouble?" and then entered on a 
fearful catalogue of all the illnesses i had been guilty of, and 
all the acts of sleeplessness i had committed, and all the high 
places i had tumbled from, and all the low places i had tumbled 
into, and all the injuries i had done myself, and all the times she 
had wished me in my grave, and i had contumaciously refused to go 
there. 
i think the romans must have aggravated one another very much, with 
their noses. perhaps, they became the restless people they were, in 
consequence. anyhow, mr. wopsle's roman nose so aggravated me, 
during the recital of my misdemeanours, that i should have liked to 
pull it until he howled. but, all i had endured up to this time, 
was nothing in comparison with the awful feelings that took 
possession of me when the pause was broken which ensued upon my 
sister's recital, and in which pause everybody had looked at me (as 
i felt painfully conscious) with indignation and abhorrence. 
"yet," said mr. pumblechook, leading the company gently back to the 
theme from which they had strayed, "pork - regarded as biled - is 
rich, too; ain't it?" 
"have a little brandy, uncle," said my sister. 
o heavens, it had come at last! he would find it was weak, he would 
say it was weak, and i was lost! i held tight to the leg of the 
table under the cloth, with both hands, and awaited my fate. 
my sister went for the stone bottle, came back with the stone 
bottle, and poured his brandy out: no one else taking any. the 
wretched man trifled with his glass - took it up, looked at it 
through the light, put it down - prolonged my misery. all this 
time, mrs. joe and joe were briskly clearing the table for the pie 
and pudding. 
i couldn't keep my eyes off him. always holding tight by the leg of 
the table with my hands and feet, i saw the miserable creature 
finger his glass playfully, take it up, smile, throw his head back, 
and drink the brandy off. instantly afterwards, the company were 
seized with unspeakable consternation, owing to his springing to 
his feet, turning round several times in an appalling spasmodic 
whooping-cough dance, and rushing out at the door; he then became 
visible through the window, violently plunging and expectorating, 
making the most hideous faces, and apparently out of his mind. 
i held on tight, while mrs. joe and joe ran to him. i didn't know 
how i had done it, but i had no doubt i had murdered him somehow. 
in my dreadful situation, it was a relief when he was brought back, 
and, surveying the company all round as if they had disagreed with 
him, sank down into his chair with the one significant gasp, "tar!" 
i had filled up the bottle from the tar-water jug. i knew he would 
be worse by-and-by. i moved the table, like a medium of the present 
day, by the vigour of my unseen hold upon it. 
"tar!" cried my sister, in amazement. "why, how ever could tar come 
there?" 
but, uncle pumblechook, who was omnipotent in that kitchen, 
wouldn't hear the word, wouldn't hear of the subject, imperiously 
waved it all away with his hand, and asked for hot gin-and-water. 
my sister, who had begun to be alarmingly meditative, had to employ 
herself actively in getting the gin, the hot water, the sugar, and 
the lemon-peel, and mixing them. for the time being at least, i was 
saved. i still held on to the leg of the table, but clutched it now 
with the fervour of gratitude. 
by degrees, i became calm enough to release my grasp and partake of 
pudding. mr. pumblechook partook of pudding. all partook of pudding. 
the course terminated, and mr. pumblechook had begun to beam under 
the genial influence of gin-and-water. i began to think i should 
get over the day, when my sister said to joe, "clean plates - 
cold." 
i clutched the leg of the table again immediately, and pressed it 
to my bosom as if it had been the companion of my youth and friend 
of my soul. i foresaw what was coming, and i felt that this time i 
really was gone. 
"you must taste," said my sister, addressing the guests with her 
best grace, "you must taste, to finish with, such a delightful and 
delicious present of uncle pumblechook's!" 
must they! let them not hope to taste it! 
"you must know," said my sister, rising, "it's a pie; a savoury 
pork pie." 
the company murmured their compliments. uncle pumblechook, sensible 
of having deserved well of his fellow-creatures, said - quite 
vivaciously, all things considered - "well, mrs. joe, we'll do our 
best endeavours; let us have a cut at this same pie." 
my sister went out to get it. i heard her steps proceed to the 
pantry. i saw mr. pumblechook balance his knife. i saw re-awakening 
appetite in the roman nostrils of mr. wopsle. i heard mr. hubble 
remark that "a bit of savoury pork pie would lay atop of anything 
you could mention, and do no harm," and i heard joe say, "you shall 
have some, pip." i have never been absolutely certain whether i 
uttered a shrill yell of terror, merely in spirit, or in the bodily 
hearing of the company. i felt that i could bear no more, and that 
i must run away. i released the leg of the table, and ran for my 
life. 
but, i ran no further than the house door, for there i ran head 
foremost into a party of soldiers with their muskets: one of whom 
held out a pair of handcuffs to me, saying, "here you are, look 
sharp, come on!" 
chapter 5 
the apparition of a file of soldiers ringing down the butt-ends of 
their loaded muskets on our door-step, caused the dinner-party to 
rise from table in confusion, and caused mrs. joe re-entering the 
kitchen empty-handed, to stop short and stare, in her wondering 
lament of "gracious goodness gracious me, what's gone - with the - 
pie!" 
the sergeant and i were in the kitchen when mrs. joe stood staring; 
at which crisis i partially recovered the use of my senses. it was 
the sergeant who had spoken to me, and he was now looking round at 
the company, with his handcuffs invitingly extended towards them in 
his right hand, and his left on my shoulder. 
"excuse me, ladies and gentleman," said the sergeant, "but as i 
have mentioned at the door to this smart young shaver" (which he 
hadn't), "i am on a chase in the name of the king, and i want the 
blacksmith." 
"and pray what might you want with him?" retorted my sister, quick 
to resent his being wanted at all. 
"missis," returned the gallant sergeant, "speaking for myself, i 
should reply, the honour and pleasure of his fine wife's 
acquaintance; speaking for the king, i answer, a little job done." 
this was received as rather neat in the sergeant; insomuch that mr 
pumblechook cried audibly, "good again!" 
"you see, blacksmith," said the sergeant, who had by this time 
picked out joe with his eye, "we have had an accident with these, 
and i find the lock of one of 'em goes wrong, and the coupling 
don't act pretty. as they are wanted for immediate service, will 
you throw your eye over them?" 
joe threw his eye over them, and pronounced that the job would 
necessitate the lighting of his forge fire, and would take nearer 
two hours than one, "will it? then will you set about it at once, 
blacksmith?" said the off-hand sergeant, "as it's on his majesty's 
service. and if my men can beat a hand anywhere, they'll make 
themselves useful." with that, he called to his men, who came 
trooping into the kitchen one after another, and piled their arms 
in a corner. and then they stood about, as soldiers do; now, with 
their hands loosely clasped before them; now, resting a knee or a 
shoulder; now, easing a belt or a pouch; now, opening the door to 
spit stiffly over their high stocks, out into the yard. 
all these things i saw without then knowing that i saw them, for i 
was in an agony of apprehension. but, beginning to perceive that 
the handcuffs were not for me, and that the military had so far got 
the better of the pie as to put it in the background, i collected a 
little more of my scattered wits. 
"would you give me the time?" said the sergeant, addressing himself 
to mr. pumblechook, as to a man whose appreciative powers justified 
the inference that he was equal to the time. 
"it's just gone half-past two." 
"that's not so bad," said the sergeant, reflecting; "even if i was 
forced to halt here nigh two hours, that'll do. how far might you 
call yourselves from the marshes, hereabouts? not above a mile, i 
reckon?" 
"just a mile," said mrs. joe. 
"that'll do. we begin to close in upon 'em about dusk. a little 
before dusk, my orders are. that'll do." 
"convicts, sergeant?" asked mr. wopsle, in a matter-of-course way. 
"ay!" returned the sergeant, "two. they're pretty well known to be 
out on the marshes still, and they won't try to get clear of 'em 
before dusk. anybody here seen anything of any such game?" 
everybody, myself excepted, said no, with confidence. nobody 
thought of me. 
"well!" said the sergeant, "they'll find themselves trapped in a 
circle, i expect, sooner than they count on. now, blacksmith! if 
you're ready, his majesty the king is." 
joe had got his coat and waistcoat and cravat off, and his leather 
apron on, and passed into the forge. one of the soldiers opened its 
wooden windows, another lighted the fire, another turned to at 
the bellows, the rest stood round the blaze, which was soon 
roaring. then joe began to hammer and clink, hammer and clink, and 
we all looked on. 
the interest of the impending pursuit not only absorbed the general 
attention, but even made my sister liberal. she drew a pitcher of 
beer from the cask, for the soldiers, and invited the sergeant to 
take a glass of brandy. but mr. pumblechook said, sharply, "give him 
wine, mum. i'll engage there's no tar in that:" so, the sergeant 
thanked him and said that as he preferred his drink without tar, he 
would take wine, if it was equally convenient. when it was given 
him, he drank his majesty's health and compliments of the season, 
and took it all at a mouthful and smacked his lips. 
"good stuff, eh, sergeant?" said mr. pumblechook. 
"i'll tell you something," returned the sergeant; "i suspect that 
stuff's of your providing." 
mr. pumblechook, with a fat sort of laugh, said, "ay, ay? why?" 
"because," returned the sergeant, clapping him on the shoulder, 
"you're a man that knows what's what." 
"d'ye think so?" said mr. pumblechook, with his former laugh. "have 
another glass!" 
"with you. hob and nob," returned the sergeant. "the top of mine to 
the foot of yours - the foot of yours to the top of mine - ring 
once, ring twice - the best tune on the musical glasses! your 
health. may you live a thousand years, and never be a worse judge 
of the right sort than you are at the present moment of your life!" 
the sergeant tossed off his glass again and seemed quite ready for 
another glass. i noticed that mr. pumblechook in his hospitality 
appeared to forget that he had made a present of the wine, but took 
the bottle from mrs. joe and had all the credit of handing it about 
in a gush of joviality. even i got some. and he was so very free of 
the wine that he even called for the other bottle, and handed that 
about with the same liberality, when the first was gone. 
as i watched them while they all stood clustering about the forge, 
enjoying themselves so much, i thought what terrible good sauce for 
a dinner my fugitive friend on the marshes was. they had not 
enjoyed themselves a quarter so much, before the entertainment was 
brightened with the excitement he furnished. and now, when they 
were all in lively anticipation of "the two villains" being taken, 
and when the bellows seemed to roar for the fugitives, the fire to 
flare for them, the smoke to hurry away in pursuit of them, joe to 
hammer and clink for them, and all the murky shadows on the wall to 
shake at them in menace as the blaze rose and sank and the red-hot 
sparks dropped and died, the pale after-noon outside, almost seemed 
in my pitying young fancy to have turned pale on their account, 
poor wretches. 
at last, joe's job was done, and the ringing and roaring stopped. 
as joe got on his coat, he mustered courage to propose that some of 
us should go down with the soldiers and see what came of the hunt. 
mr. pumblechook and mr. hubble declined, on the plea of a pipe and 
ladies' society; but mr. wopsle said he would go, if joe would. joe 
said he was agreeable, and would take me, if mrs. joe approved. we 
never should have got leave to go, i am sure, but for mrs. joe's 
curiosity to know all about it and how it ended. as it was, she 
merely stipulated, "if you bring the boy back with his head blown 
to bits by a musket, don't look to me to put it together again." 
the sergeant took a polite leave of the ladies, and parted from mr. 
pumblechook as from a comrade; though i doubt if he were quite as 
fully sensible of that gentleman's merits under arid conditions, as 
when something moist was going. his men resumed their muskets and 
fell in. mr. wopsle, joe, and i, received strict charge to keep in 
the rear, and to speak no word after we reached the marshes. when 
we were all out in the raw air and were steadily moving towards our 
business, i treasonably whispered to joe, "i hope, joe, we shan't 
find them." and joe whispered to me, "i'd give a shilling if they 
had cut and run, pip." 
we were joined by no stragglers from the village, for the weather 
was cold and threatening, the way dreary, the footing bad, darkness 
coming on, and the people had good fires in-doors and were keeping 
the day. a few faces hurried to glowing windows and looked after 
us, but none came out. we passed the finger-post, and held straight 
on to the churchyard. there, we were stopped a few minutes by a 
signal from the sergeant's hand, while two or three of his men 
dispersed themselves among the graves, and also examined the porch. 
they came in again without finding anything, and then we struck out 
on the open marshes, through the gate at the side of the 
churchyard. a bitter sleet came rattling against us here on the 
east wind, and joe took me on his back. 
now that we were out upon the dismal wilderness where they little 
thought i had been within eight or nine hours and had seen both men 
hiding, i considered for the first time, with great dread, if we 
should come upon them, would my particular convict suppose that it 
was i who had brought the soldiers there? he had asked me if i was 
a deceiving imp, and he had said i should be a fierce young hound 
if i joined the hunt against him. would he believe that i was both 
imp and hound in treacherous earnest, and had betrayed him? 
it was of no use asking myself this question now. there i was, on 
joe's back, and there was joe beneath me, charging at the ditches 
like a hunter, and stimulating mr. wopsle not to tumble on his roman 
nose, and to keep up with us. the soldiers were in front of us, 
extending into a pretty wide line with an interval between man and 
man. we were taking the course i had begun with, and from which i 
had diverged in the mist. either the mist was not out again yet, or 
the wind had dispelled it. under the low red glare of sunset, the 
beacon, and the gibbet, and the mound of the battery, and the 
opposite shore of the river, were plain, though all of a watery 
lead colour. 
with my heart thumping like a blacksmith at joe's broad shoulder, i 
looked all about for any sign of the convicts. i could see none, i 
could hear none. mr. wopsle had greatly alarmed me more than once, 
by his blowing and hard breathing; but i knew the sounds by this 
time, and could dissociate them from the object of pursuit. i got a 
dreadful start, when i thought i heard the file still going; but it 
was only a sheep bell. the sheep stopped in their eating and looked 
timidly at us; and the cattle, their heads turned from the wind and 
sleet, stared angrily as if they held us responsible for both 
annoyances; but, except these things, and the shudder of the dying 
day in every blade of grass, there was no break in the bleak 
stillness of the marshes. 
the soldiers were moving on in the direction of the old battery, 
and we were moving on a little way behind them, when, all of a 
sudden, we all stopped. for, there had reached us on the wings of 
the wind and rain, a long shout. it was repeated. it was at a 
distance towards the east, but it was long and loud. nay, there 
seemed to be two or more shouts raised together - if one might 
judge from a confusion in the sound. 
to this effect the sergeant and the nearest men were speaking under 
their breath, when joe and i came up. after another moment's 
listening, joe (who was a good judge) agreed, and mr. wopsle (who 
was a bad judge) agreed. the sergeant, a decisive man, ordered that 
the sound should not be answered, but that the course should be 
changed, and that his men should make towards it "at the double." 
so we slanted to the right (where the east was), and joe pounded 
away so wonderfully, that i had to hold on tight to keep my seat. 
it was a run indeed now, and what joe called, in the only two words 
he spoke all the time, "a winder." down banks and up banks, and 
over gates, and splashing into dykes, and breaking among coarse 
rushes: no man cared where he went. as we came nearer to the 
shouting, it became more and more apparent that it was made by more 
than one voice. sometimes, it seemed to stop altogether, and then 
the soldiers stopped. when it broke out again, the soldiers made 
for it at a greater rate than ever, and we after them. after a 
while, we had so run it down, that we could hear one voice calling 
"murder!" and another voice, "convicts! runaways! guard! this way 
for the runaway convicts!" then both voices would seem to be 
stifled in a struggle, and then would break out again. and when it 
had come to this, the soldiers ran like deer, and joe too. 
the sergeant ran in first, when we had run the noise quite down, 
and two of his men ran in close upon him. their pieces were cocked 
and levelled when we all ran in. 
"here are both men!" panted the sergeant, struggling at the bottom 
of a ditch. "surrender, you two! and confound you for two wild 
beasts! come asunder!" 
water was splashing, and mud was flying, and oaths were being 
sworn, and blows were being struck, when some more men went down 
into the ditch to help the sergeant, and dragged out, separately, 
my convict and the other one. both were bleeding and panting and 
execrating and struggling; but of course i knew them both directly. 
"mind!" said my convict, wiping blood from his face with his ragged 
sleeves, and shaking torn hair from his fingers: "i took him! i give 
him up to you! mind that!" 
"it's not much to be particular about," said the sergeant; "it'll do 
you small good, my man, being in the same plight yourself. 
handcuffs there!" 
"i don't expect it to do me any good. i don't want it to do me more 
good than it does now," said my convict, with a greedy laugh. "i 
took him. he knows it. that's enough for me." 
the other convict was livid to look at, and, in addition to the old 
bruised left side of his face, seemed to be bruised and torn all 
over. he could not so much as get his breath to speak, until they 
were both separately handcuffed, but leaned upon a soldier to keep 
himself from falling. 
"take notice, guard - he tried to murder me," were his first words. 
"tried to murder him?" said my convict, disdainfully. "try, and not 
do it? i took him, and giv' him up; that's what i done. i not only 
prevented him getting off the marshes, but i dragged him here - 
dragged him this far on his way back. he's a gentleman, if you 
please, this villain. now, the hulks has got its gentleman again, 
through me. murder him? worth my while, too, to murder him, when i 
could do worse and drag him back!" 
the other one still gasped, "he tried - he tried - to - murder me. 
bear - bear witness." 
"lookee here!" said my convict to the sergeant. "single-handed i 
got clear of the prison-ship; i made a dash and i done it. i could 
ha' got clear of these death-cold flats likewise - look at my leg: 
you won't find much iron on it - if i hadn't made the discovery that 
he was here. let him go free? let him profit by the means as i found 
out? let him make a tool of me afresh and again? once more? no, no, 
no. if i had died at the bottom there;" and he made an emphatic 
swing at the ditch with his manacled hands; "i'd have held to him 
with that grip, that you should have been safe to find him in my 
hold." 
the other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme horror of his 
companion, repeated, "he tried to murder me. i should have been a 
dead man if you had not come up." 
"he lies!" said my convict, with fierce energy. "he's a liar born, 
and he'll die a liar. look at his face; ain't it written there? let 
him turn those eyes of his on me. i defy him to do it." 
the other, with an effort at a scornful smile - which could not, 
however, collect the nervous working of his mouth into any set 
expression - looked at the soldiers, and looked about at the 
marshes and at the sky, but certainly did not look at the speaker. 
"do you see him?" pursued my convict. "do you see what a villain he 
is? do you see those grovelling and wandering eyes? that's how he 
looked when we were tried together. he never looked at me." 
the other, always working and working his dry lips and turning his 
eyes restlessly about him far and near, did at last turn them for a 
moment on the speaker, with the words, "you are not much to look 
at," and with a half-taunting glance at the bound hands. at that 
point, my convict became so frantically exasperated, that he would 
have rushed upon him but for the interposition of the soldiers. 
"didn't i tell you," said the other convict then, "that he would 
murder me, if he could?" and any one could see that he shook with 
fear, and that there broke out upon his lips, curious white flakes, 
like thin snow. 
"enough of this parley," said the sergeant. "light those torches." 
as one of the soldiers, who carried a basket in lieu of a gun, went 
down on his knee to open it, my convict looked round him for the 
first time, and saw me. i had alighted from joe's back on the brink 
of the ditch when we came up, and had not moved since. i looked at 
him eagerly when he looked at me, and slightly moved my hands and 
shook my head. i had been waiting for him to see me, that i might 
try to assure him of my innocence. it was not at all expressed to 
me that he even comprehended my intention, for he gave me a look 
that i did not understand, and it all passed in a moment. but if he 
had looked at me for an hour or for a day, i could not have 
remembered his face ever afterwards, as having been more attentive. 
the soldier with the basket soon got a light, and lighted three or 
four torches, and took one himself and distributed the others. it 
had been almost dark before, but now it seemed quite dark, and soon 
afterwards very dark. before we departed from that spot, four 
soldiers standing in a ring, fired twice into the air. presently we 
saw other torches kindled at some distance behind us, and others on 
the marshes on the opposite bank of the river. "all right," said 
the sergeant. "march." 
we had not gone far when three cannon were fired ahead of us with a 
sound that seemed to burst something inside my ear. "you are 
expected on board," said the sergeant to my convict; "they know you 
are coming. don't straggle, my man. close up here." 
the two were kept apart, and each walked surrounded by a separate 
guard. i had hold of joe's hand now, and joe carried one of the 
torches. mr. wopsle had been for going back, but joe was resolved to 
see it out, so we went on with the party. there was a reasonably 
good path now, mostly on the edge of the river, with a divergence 
here and there where a dyke came, with a miniature windmill on it 
and a muddy sluice-gate. when i looked round, i could see the other 
lights coming in after us. the torches we carried, dropped great 
blotches of fire upon the track, and i could see those, too, lying 
smoking and flaring. i could see nothing else but black darkness. 
our lights warmed the air about us with their pitchy blaze, and the 
two prisoners seemed rather to like that, as they limped along in 
the midst of the muskets. we could not go fast, because of their 
lameness; and they were so spent, that two or three times we had to 
halt while they rested. 
after an hour or so of this travelling, we came to a rough wooden 
hut and a landing-place. there was a guard in the hut, and they 
challenged, and the sergeant answered. then, we went into the hut 
where there was a smell of tobacco and whitewash, and a bright 
fire, and a lamp, and a stand of muskets, and a drum, and a low 
wooden bedstead, like an overgrown mangle without the machinery, 
capable of holding about a dozen soldiers all at once. three or 
four soldiers who lay upon it in their great-coats, were not much 
interested in us, but just lifted their heads and took a sleepy 
stare, and then lay down again. the sergeant made some kind of 
report, and some entry in a book, and then the convict whom i call 
the other convict was drafted off with his guard, to go on board 
first. 
my convict never looked at me, except that once. while we stood in 
the hut, he stood before the fire looking thoughtfully at it, or 
putting up his feet by turns upon the hob, and looking thoughtfully 
at them as if he pitied them for their recent adventures. suddenly, 
he turned to the sergeant, and remarked: 
"i wish to say something respecting this escape. it may prevent 
some persons laying under suspicion alonger me." 
"you can say what you like," returned the sergeant, standing coolly 
looking at him with his arms folded, "but you have no call to say 
it here. you'll have opportunity enough to say about it, and hear 
about it, before it's done with, you know." 
"i know, but this is another pint, a separate matter. a man can't 
starve; at least i can't. i took some wittles, up at the willage 
over yonder - where the church stands a'most out on the marshes." 
"you mean stole," said the sergeant. 
"and i'll tell you where from. from the blacksmith's." 
"halloa!" said the sergeant, staring at joe. 
"halloa, pip!" said joe, staring at me. 
"it was some broken wittles - that's what it was - and a dram of 
liquor, and a pie." 
"have you happened to miss such an article as a pie, blacksmith?" 
asked the sergeant, confidentially. 
"my wife did, at the very moment when you came in. don't you know, 
pip?" 
"so," said my convict, turning his eyes on joe in a moody manner, 
and without the least glance at me; "so you're the blacksmith, are 
you? than i'm sorry to say, i've eat your pie." 
"god knows you're welcome to it - so far as it was ever mine," 
returned joe, with a saving remembrance of mrs. joe. "we don't know 
what you have done, but we wouldn't have you starved to death for 
it, poor miserable fellow-creatur. - would us, pip?" 
the something that i had noticed before, clicked in the man's 
throat again, and he turned his back. the boat had returned, and 
his guard were ready, so we followed him to the landing-place made 
of rough stakes and stones, and saw him put into the boat, which 
was rowed by a crew of convicts like himself. no one seemed 
surprised to see him, or interested in seeing him, or glad to see 
him, or sorry to see him, or spoke a word, except that somebody in 
the boat growled as if to dogs, "give way, you!" which was the 
signal for the dip of the oars. by the light of the torches, we saw 
the black hulk lying out a little way from the mud of the shore, like 
a wicked noah's ark. cribbed and barred and moored by massive rusty 
chains, the prison-ship seemed in my young eyes to be ironed like 
the prisoners. we saw the boat go alongside, and we saw him taken 
up the side and disappear. then, the ends of the torches were flung 
hissing into the water, and went out, as if it were all over with 
him. 
chapter 6 
my state of mind regarding the pilfering from which i had been so 
unexpectedly exonerated, did not impel me to frank disclosure; but 
i hope it had some dregs of good at the bottom of it. 
i do not recall that i felt any tenderness of conscience in 
reference to mrs. joe, when the fear of being found out was lifted 
off me. but i loved joe - perhaps for no better reason in those 
early days than because the dear fellow let me love him - and, as 
to him, my inner self was not so easily composed. it was much upon 
my mind (particularly when i first saw him looking about for his 
file) that i ought to tell joe the whole truth. yet i did not, and 
for the reason that i mistrusted that if i did, he would think me 
worse than i was. the fear of losing joe's confidence, and of 
thenceforth sitting in the chimney-corner at night staring drearily 
at my for ever lost companion and friend, tied up my tongue. i 
morbidly represented to myself that if joe knew it, i never 
afterwards could see him at the fireside feeling his fair whisker, 
without thinking that he was meditating on it. that, if joe knew 
it, i never afterwards could see him glance, however casually, at 
yesterday's meat or pudding when it came on to-day's table, without 
thinking that he was debating whether i had been in the pantry. 
that, if joe knew it, and at any subsequent period of our joint 
domestic life remarked that his beer was flat or thick, the 
conviction that he suspected tar in it, would bring a rush of blood 
to my face. in a word, i was too cowardly to do what i knew to be 
right, as i had been too cowardly to avoid doing what i knew to be 
wrong. i had had no intercourse with the world at that time, and i 
imitated none of its many inhabitants who act in this manner. quite 
an untaught genius, i made the discovery of the line of action for 
myself. 
as i was sleepy before we were far away from the prison-ship, joe 
took me on his back again and carried me home. he must have had a 
tiresome journey of it, for mr. wopsle, being knocked up, was in 
such a very bad temper that if the church had been thrown open, he 
would probably have excommunicated the whole expedition, beginning 
with joe and myself. in his lay capacity, he persisted in sitting 
down in the damp to such an insane extent, that when his coat was 
taken off to be dried at the kitchen fire, the circumstantial 
evidence on his trousers would have hanged him if it had been a 
capital offence. 
by that time, i was staggering on the kitchen floor like a little 
drunkard, through having been newly set upon my feet, and through 
having been fast asleep, and through waking in the heat and lights 
and noise of tongues. as i came to myself (with the aid of a heavy 
thump between the shoulders, and the restorative exclamation "yah! 
was there ever such a boy as this!" from my sister), i found joe 
telling them about the convict's confession, and all the visitors 
suggesting different ways by which he had got into the pantry. mr. 
pumblechook made out, after carefully surveying the premises, that 
he had first got upon the roof of the forge, and had then got upon 
the roof of the house, and had then let himself down the kitchen 
chimney by a rope made of his bedding cut into strips; and as mr. 
pumblechook was very positive and drove his own chaise-cart - over 
everybody - it was agreed that it must be so. mr. wopsle, indeed, 
wildly cried out "no!" with the feeble malice of a tired man; but, 
as he had no theory, and no coat on, he was unanimously set at 
nought - not to mention his smoking hard behind, as he stood with 
his back to the kitchen fire to draw the damp out: which was not 
calculated to inspire confidence. 
this was all i heard that night before my sister clutched me, as a 
slumberous offence to the company's eyesight, and assisted me up to 
bed with such a strong hand that i seemed to have fifty boots on, 
and to be dangling them all against the edges of the stairs. my 
state of mind, as i have described it, began before i was up in the 
morning, and lasted long after the subject had died out, and had 
ceased to be mentioned saving on exceptional occasions. 
chapter 7 
at the time when i stood in the churchyard, reading the family 
tombstones, i had just enough learning to be able to spell them 
out. my construction even of their simple meaning was not very 
correct, for i read "wife of the above" as a complimentary 
reference to my father's exaltation to a better world; and if any 
one of my deceased relations had been referred to as "below," i 
have no doubt i should have formed the worst opinions of that 
member of the family. neither, were my notions of the theological 
positions to which my catechism bound me, at all accurate; for, i 
have a lively remembrance that i supposed my declaration that i was 
to "walk in the same all the days of my life," laid me under an 
obligation always to go through the village from our house in one 
particular direction, and never to vary it by turning down by the 
wheelwright's or up by the mill. 
when i was old enough, i was to be apprenticed to joe, and until i 
could assume that dignity i was not to be what mrs. joe called 
"pompeyed," or (as i render it) pampered. therefore, i was not only 
odd-boy about the forge, but if any neighbour happened to want an 
extra boy to frighten birds, or pick up stones, or do any such job, 
i was favoured with the employment. in order, however, that our 
superior position might not be compromised thereby, a money-box was 
kept on the kitchen mantel-shelf, in to which it was publicly made 
known that all my earnings were dropped. i have an impression that 
they were to be contributed eventually towards the liquidation of 
the national debt, but i know i had no hope of any personal 
participation in the treasure. 
mr. wopsle's great-aunt kept an evening school in the village; that 
is to say, she was a ridiculous old woman of limited means and 
unlimited infirmity, who used to go to sleep from six to seven 
every evening, in the society of youth who paid twopence per week 
each, for the improving opportunity of seeing her do it. she rented 
a small cottage, and mr. wopsle had the room up-stairs, where we 
students used to overhear him reading aloud in a most dignified and 
terrific manner, and occasionally bumping on the ceiling. there was 
a fiction that mr. wopsle "examined" the scholars, once a quarter. 
what he did on those occasions was to turn up his cuffs, stick up 
his hair, and give us mark antony's oration over the body of 
caesar. this was always followed by collins's ode on the passions, 
wherein i particularly venerated mr. wopsle as revenge, throwing his 
blood-stained sword in thunder down, and taking the war-denouncing 
trumpet with a withering look. it was not with me then, as it was 
in later life, when i fell into the society of the passions, and 
compared them with collins and wopsle, rather to the disadvantage 
of both gentlemen. 
mr. wopsle's great-aunt, besides keeping this educational 
institution, kept - in the same room - a little general shop. she 
had no idea what stock she had, or what the price of anything in it 
was; but there was a little greasy memorandum-book kept in a 
drawer, which served as a catalogue of prices, and by this oracle 
biddy arranged all the shop transaction. biddy was mr. wopsle's 
great-aunt's granddaughter; i confess myself quiet unequal to the 
working out of the problem, what relation she was to mr. wopsle. she 
was an orphan like myself; like me, too, had been brought up by 
hand. she was most noticeable, i thought, in respect of her 
extremities; for, her hair always wanted brushing, her hands always 
wanted washing, and her shoes always wanted mending and pulling up 
at heel. this description must be received with a week-day 
limitation. on sundays, she went to church elaborated. 
much of my unassisted self, and more by the help of biddy than of 
mr. wopsle's great-aunt, i struggled through the alphabet as if it 
had been a bramble-bush; getting considerably worried and scratched 
by every letter. after that, i fell among those thieves, the nine 
figures, who seemed every evening to do something new to disguise 
themselves and baffle recognition. but, at last i began, in a 
purblind groping way, to read, write, and cipher, on the very 
smallest scale. 
one night, i was sitting in the chimney-corner with my slate, 
expending great efforts on the production of a letter to joe. i 
think it must have been a fully year after our hunt upon the 
marshes, for it was a long time after, and it was winter and a hard 
frost. with an alphabet on the hearth at my feet for reference, i 
contrived in an hour or two to print and smear this epistle: 
"mi deer jo i ope u r kr wite well i ope i shal son b habell 4 2 
teedge u jo an then we shorl b so glodd an wen i m prengtd 2 u jo 
wot larx an bleve me inf xn pip." 
there was no indispensable necessity for my communicating with joe 
by letter, inasmuch as he sat beside me and we were alone. but, i 
delivered this written communication (slate and all) with my own 
hand, and joe received it as a miracle of erudition. 
"i say, pip, old chap!" cried joe, opening his blue eyes wide, 
"what a scholar you are! an't you?" 
"i should like to be," said i, glancing at the slate as he held it: 
with a misgiving that the writing was rather hilly. 
"why, here's a j," said joe, "and a o equal to anythink! here's a j 
and a o, pip, and a j-o, joe." 
i had never heard joe read aloud to any greater extent than this 
monosyllable, and i had observed at church last sunday when i 
accidentally held our prayer-book upside down, that it seemed to 
suit his convenience quite as well as if it had been all right. 
wishing to embrace the present occasion of finding out whether in 
teaching joe, i should have to begin quite at the beginning, i 
said, "ah! but read the rest, jo." 
"the rest, eh, pip?" said joe, looking at it with a slowly 
searching eye, "one, two, three. why, here's three js, and three 
os, and three j-o, joes in it, pip!" 
i leaned over joe, and, with the aid of my forefinger, read him the 
whole letter. 
"astonishing!" said joe, when i had finished. "you are a scholar." 
"how do you spell gargery, joe?" i asked him, with a modest 
patronage. 
"i don't spell it at all," said joe. 
"but supposing you did?" 
"it can't be supposed," said joe. "tho' i'm oncommon fond of 
reading, too." 
"are you, joe?" 
"on-common. give me," said joe, "a good book, or a good newspaper, 
and sit me down afore a good fire, and i ask no better. lord!" he 
continued, after rubbing his knees a little, "when you do come to a 
j and a o, and says you, "here, at last, is a j-o, joe," how 
interesting reading is!" 
i derived from this last, that joe's education, like steam, was yet 
in its infancy, pursuing the subject, i inquired: 
"didn't you ever go to school, joe, when you were as little as me?" 
"no, pip." 
"why didn't you ever go to school, joe, when you were as little as 
me?" 
"well, pip," said joe, taking up the poker, and settling himself to 
his usual occupation when he was thoughtful, of slowly raking the 
fire between the lower bars: "i'll tell you. my father, pip, he 
were given to drink, and when he were overtook with drink, he 
hammered away at my mother, most onmerciful. it were a'most the 
only hammering he did, indeed, 'xcepting at myself. and he hammered 
at me with a wigour only to be equalled by the wigour with which he 
didn't hammer at his anwil. - you're a-listening and understanding, 
pip?" 
"yes, joe." 
"'consequence, my mother and me we ran away from my father, 
several times; and then my mother she'd go out to work, and she'd 
say, "joe," she'd say, "now, please god, you shall have some 
schooling, child," and she'd put me to school. but my father were 
that good in his hart that he couldn't abear to be without us. so, 
he'd come with a most tremenjous crowd and make such a row at the 
doors of the houses where we was, that they used to be obligated to 
have no more to do with us and to give us up to him. and then he 
took us home and hammered us. which, you see, pip," said joe, 
pausing in his meditative raking of the fire, and looking at me, 
"were a drawback on my learning." 
"certainly, poor joe!" 
"though mind you, pip," said joe, with a judicial touch or two of 
the poker on the top bar, "rendering unto all their doo, and 
maintaining equal justice betwixt man and man, my father were that 
good in his hart, don't you see?" 
i didn't see; but i didn't say so. 
"well!" joe pursued, "somebody must keep the pot a biling, pip, or 
the pot won't bile, don't you know?" 
i saw that, and said so. 
"'consequence, my father didn't make objections to my going to 
work; so i went to work to work at my present calling, which were 
his too, if he would have followed it, and i worked tolerable hard, 
i assure you, pip. in time i were able to keep him, and i kept him 
till he went off in a purple leptic fit. and it were my intentions 
to have had put upon his tombstone that whatsume'er the failings on 
his part, remember reader he were that good in his hart." 
joe recited this couplet with such manifest pride and careful 
perspicuity, that i asked him if he had made it himself. 
"i made it," said joe, "my own self. i made it in a moment. it was 
like striking out a horseshoe complete, in a single blow. i never 
was so much surprised in all my life - couldn't credit my own ed - 
to tell you the truth, hardly believed it were my own ed. as i was 
saying, pip, it were my intentions to have had it cut over him; but 
poetry costs money, cut it how you will, small or large, and it 
were not done. not to mention bearers, all the money that could be 
spared were wanted for my mother. she were in poor elth, and quite 
broke. she weren't long of following, poor soul, and her share of 
peace come round at last." 
joe's blue eyes turned a little watery; he rubbed, first one of 
them, and then the other, in a most uncongenial and uncomfortable 
manner, with the round knob on the top of the poker. 
"it were but lonesome then," said joe, "living here alone, and i 
got acquainted with your sister. now, pip;" joe looked firmly at 
me, as if he knew i was not going to agree with him; "your sister 
is a fine figure of a woman." 
i could not help looking at the fire, in an obvious state of doubt. 
"whatever family opinions, or whatever the world's opinions, on 
that subject may be, pip, your sister is," joe tapped the top bar 
with the poker after every word following, "a - fine - figure - of 
a - woman!" 
i could think of nothing better to say than "i am glad you think 
so, joe." 
"so am i," returned joe, catching me up. "i am glad i think so, 
pip. a little redness or a little matter of bone, here or there, 
what does it signify to me?" 
i sagaciously observed, if it didn't signify to him, to whom did it 
signify? 
"certainly!" assented joe. "that's it. you're right, old chap! when 
i got acquainted with your sister, it were the talk how she was 
bringing you up by hand. very kind of her too, all the folks said, 
and i said, along with all the folks. as to you," joe pursued with 
a countenance expressive of seeing something very nasty indeed: "if 
you could have been aware how small and flabby and mean you was, 
dear me, you'd have formed the most contemptible opinion of 
yourself!" 
not exactly relishing this, i said, "never mind me, joe." 
"but i did mind you, pip," he returned with tender simplicity. 
"when i offered to your sister to keep company, and to be asked in 
church at such times as she was willing and ready to come to the 
forge, i said to her, 'and bring the poor little child. god bless 
the poor little child,' i said to your sister, 'there's room for 
him at the forge!'" 
i broke out crying and begging pardon, and hugged joe round the 
neck: who dropped the poker to hug me, and to say, "ever the best 
of friends; an't us, pip? don't cry, old chap!" 
when this little interruption was over, joe resumed: 
"well, you see, pip, and here we are! that's about where it lights; 
here we are! now, when you take me in hand in my learning, pip (and 
i tell you beforehand i am awful dull, most awful dull), mrs. joe 
mustn't see too much of what we're up to. it must be done, as i may 
say, on the sly. and why on the sly? i'll tell you why, pip." 
he had taken up the poker again; without which, i doubt if he could 
have proceeded in his demonstration. 
"your sister is given to government." 
"given to government, joe?" i was startled, for i had some shadowy 
idea (and i am afraid i must add, hope) that joe had divorced her 
in a favour of the lords of the admiralty, or treasury. 
"given to government," said joe. "which i meantersay the government 
of you and myself." 
"oh!" 
"and she an't over partial to having scholars on the premises," joe 
continued, "and in partickler would not be over partial to my being 
a scholar, for fear as i might rise. like a sort or rebel, don't 
you see?" 
i was going to retort with an inquiry, and had got as far as 
"why-" when joe stopped me. 
"stay a bit. i know what you're a-going to say, pip; stay a bit! i 
don't deny that your sister comes the mo-gul over us, now and 
again. i don't deny that she do throw us back-falls, and that she 
do drop down upon us heavy. at such times as when your sister is on 
the ram-page, pip," joe sank his voice to a whisper and glanced at 
the door, "candour compels fur to admit that she is a buster." 
joe pronounced this word, as if it began with at least twelve 
capital bs. 
"why don't i rise? that were your observation when i broke it off, 
pip?" 
"yes, joe." 
"well," said joe, passing the poker into his left hand, that he 
might feel his whisker; and i had no hope of him whenever he took 
to that placid occupation; "your sister's a master-mind. a 
master-mind." 
"what's that?" i asked, in some hope of bringing him to a stand. 
but, joe was readier with his definition than i had expected, and 
completely stopped me by arguing circularly, and answering with a 
fixed look, "her." 
"and i an't a master-mind," joe resumed, when he had unfixed his 
look, and got back to his whisker. "and last of all, pip - and this 
i want to say very serious to you, old chap - i see so much in my 
poor mother, of a woman drudging and slaving and breaking her 
honest hart and never getting no peace in her mortal days, that i'm 
dead afeerd of going wrong in the way of not doing what's right by 
a woman, and i'd fur rather of the two go wrong the t'other way, 
and be a little ill-conwenienced myself. i wish it was only me that 
got put out, pip; i wish there warn't no tickler for you, old chap; 
i wish i could take it all on myself; but this is the 
up-and-down-and-straight on it, pip, and i hope you'll overlook 
shortcomings." 
young as i was, i believe that i dated a new admiration of joe from 
that night. we were equals afterwards, as we had been before; but, 
afterwards at quiet times when i sat looking at joe and thinking 
about him, i had a new sensation of feeling conscious that i was 
looking up to joe in my heart. 
"however," said joe, rising to replenish the fire; "here's the 
dutch-clock a working himself up to being equal to strike eight of 
'em, and she's not come home yet! i hope uncle pumblechook's mare 
mayn't have set a fore-foot on a piece o' ice, and gone down." 
mrs. joe made occasional trips with uncle pumblechook on 
market-days, to assist him in buying such household stuffs and 
goods as required a woman's judgment; uncle pumblechook being a 
bachelor and reposing no confidences in his domestic servant. this 
was market-day, and mrs. joe was out on one of these expeditions. 
joe made the fire and swept the hearth, and then we went to the 
door to listen for the chaise-cart. it was a dry cold night, and 
the wind blew keenly, and the frost was white and hard. a man would 
die to-night of lying out on the marshes, i thought. and then i 
looked at the stars, and considered how awful if would be for a man 
to turn his face up to them as he froze to death, and see no help 
or pity in all the glittering multitude. 
"here comes the mare," said joe, "ringing like a peal of bells!" 
the sound of her iron shoes upon the hard road was quite musical, 
as she came along at a much brisker trot than usual. we got a chair 
out, ready for mrs. joe's alighting, and stirred up the fire that 
they might see a bright window, and took a final survey of the 
kitchen that nothing might be out of its place. when we had 
completed these preparations, they drove up, wrapped to the eyes. 
mrs. joe was soon landed, and uncle pumblechook was soon down too, 
covering the mare with a cloth, and we were soon all in the 
kitchen, carrying so much cold air in with us that it seemed to 
drive all the heat out of the fire. 
"now," said mrs. joe, unwrapping herself with haste and excitement, 
and throwing her bonnet back on her shoulders where it hung by the 
strings: "if this boy an't grateful this night, he never will be!" 
i looked as grateful as any boy possibly could, who was wholly 
uninformed why he ought to assume that expression. 
"it's only to be hoped," said my sister, "that he won't be 
pomp-eyed. but i have my fears." 
"she an't in that line, mum," said mr. pumblechook. "she knows 
better." 
she? i looked at joe, making the motion with my lips and eyebrows, 
"she?" joe looked at me, making the motion with his lips and 
eyebrows, "she?" my sister catching him in the act, he drew the 
back of his hand across his nose with his usual conciliatory air on 
such occasions, and looked at her. 
"well?" said my sister, in her snappish way. "what are you staring 
at? is the house a-fire?" 
" - which some individual," joe politely hinted, "mentioned - she." 
"and she is a she, i suppose?" said my sister. "unless you call 
miss havisham a he. and i doubt if even you'll go so far as that." 
"miss havisham, up town?" said joe. 
"is there any miss havisham down town?" returned my sister. 
"she wants this boy to go and play there. and of course he's going. 
and he had better play there," said my sister, shaking her head at 
me as an encouragement to be extremely light and sportive, "or i'll 
work him." 
i had heard of miss havisham up town - everybody for miles round, 
had heard of miss havisham up town - as an immensely rich and grim 
lady who lived in a large and dismal house barricaded against 
robbers, and who led a life of seclusion. 
"well to be sure!" said joe, astounded. "i wonder how she come to 
know pip!" 
"noodle!" cried my sister. "who said she knew him?" 
" - which some individual," joe again politely hinted, "mentioned 
that she wanted him to go and play there." 
"and couldn't she ask uncle pumblechook if he knew of a boy to go 
and play there? isn't it just barely possible that uncle 
pumblechook may be a tenant of hers, and that he may sometimes - we 
won't say quarterly or half-yearly, for that would be requiring too 
much of you - but sometimes - go there to pay his rent? and 
couldn't she then ask uncle pumblechook if he knew of a boy to go 
and play there? and couldn't uncle pumblechook, being always 
considerate and thoughtful for us - though you may not think it, 
joseph," in a tone of the deepest reproach, as if he were the most 
callous of nephews, "then mention this boy, standing prancing here" 
which i solemnly declare i was not doing - "that i have for ever 
been a willing slave to?" 
"good again!" cried uncle pumblechook. "well put! prettily pointed! 
good indeed! now joseph, you know the case." 
"no, joseph," said my sister, still in a reproachful manner, while 
joe apologetically drew the back of his hand across and across his 
nose, "you do not yet - though you may not think it - know the 
case. you may consider that you do, but you do not, joseph. for you 
do not know that uncle pumblechook, being sensible that for 
anything we can tell, this boy's fortune may be made by his going 
to miss havisham's, has offered to take him into town to-night in 
his own chaise-cart, and to keep him to-night, and to take him with 
his own hands to miss havisham's to-morrow morning. and lor-a-mussy 
me!" cried my sister, casting off her bonnet in sudden desperation, 
"here i stand talking to mere mooncalfs, with uncle pumblechook 
waiting, and the mare catching cold at the door, and the boy grimed 
with crock and dirt from the hair of his head to the sole of his 
foot!" 
with that, she pounced upon me, like an eagle on a lamb, and my 
face was squeezed into wooden bowls in sinks, and my head was put 
under taps of water-butts, and i was soaped, and kneaded, and 
towelled, and thumped, and harrowed, and rasped, until i really was 
quite beside myself. (i may here remark that i suppose myself to be 
better acquainted than any living authority, with the ridgy effect 
of a wedding-ring, passing unsympathetically over the human 
countenance.) 
when my ablutions were completed, i was put into clean linen of the 
stiffest character, like a young penitent into sackcloth, and was 
trussed up in my tightest and fearfullest suit. i was then 
delivered over to mr. pumblechook, who formally received me as if he 
were the sheriff, and who let off upon me the speech that i knew he 
had been dying to make all along: "boy, be for ever grateful to all 
friends, but especially unto them which brought you up by hand!" 
"good-bye, joe!" 
"god bless you, pip, old chap!" 
i had never parted from him before, and what with my feelings and 
what with soap-suds, i could at first see no stars from the 
chaise-cart. but they twinkled out one by one, without throwing any 
light on the questions why on earth i was going to play at miss 
havisham's, and what on earth i was expected to play at. 
chapter 8 
mr. pumblechook's premises in the high-street of the market town, 
were of a peppercorny and farinaceous character, as the premises of 
a corn-chandler and seedsman should be. it appeared to me that he 
must be a very happy man indeed, to have so many little drawers in 
his shop; and i wondered when i peeped into one or two on the lower 
tiers, and saw the tied-up brown paper packets inside, whether the 
flower-seeds and bulbs ever wanted of a fine day to break out of 
those jails, and bloom. 
it was in the early morning after my arrival that i entertained 
this speculation. on the previous night, i had been sent straight 
to bed in an attic with a sloping roof, which was so low in the 
corner where the bedstead was, that i calculated the tiles as being 
within a foot of my eyebrows. in the same early morning, i 
discovered a singular affinity between seeds and corduroys. mr. 
pumblechook wore corduroys, and so did his shopman; and somehow, 
there was a general air and flavour about the corduroys, so much in 
the nature of seeds, and a general air and flavour about the seeds, 
so much in the nature of corduroys, that i hardly knew which was 
which. the same opportunity served me for noticing that mr. 
pumblechook appeared to conduct his business by looking across the 
street at the saddler, who appeared to transact his business by 
keeping his eye on the coach-maker, who appeared to get on in life 
by putting his hands in his pockets and contemplating the baker, 
who in his turn folded his arms and stared at the grocer, who stood 
at his door and yawned at the chemist. the watch-maker, always 
poring over a little desk with a magnifying glass at his eye, and 
always inspected by a group of smock-frocks poring over him through 
the glass of his shop-window, seemed to be about the only person in 
the high-street whose trade engaged his attention. 
mr. pumblechook and i breakfasted at eight o'clock in the parlour 
behind the shop, while the shopman took his mug of tea and hunch of 
bread-and-butter on a sack of peas in the front premises. i 
considered mr. pumblechook wretched company. besides being possessed 
by my sister's idea that a mortifying and penitential character 
ought to be imparted to my diet - besides giving me as much crumb 
as possible in combination with as little butter, and putting such 
a quantity of warm water into my milk that it would have been more 
candid to have left the milk out altogether - his conversation 
consisted of nothing but arithmetic. on my politely bidding him 
good morning, he said, pompously, "seven times nine, boy?" and how 
should i be able to answer, dodged in that way, in a strange place, 
on an empty stomach! i was hungry, but before i had swallowed a 
morsel, he began a running sum that lasted all through the 
breakfast. "seven?" "and four?" "and eight?" "and six?" "and two?" 
"and ten?" and so on. and after each figure was disposed of, it was 
as much as i could do to get a bite or a sup, before the next came; 
while he sat at his ease guessing nothing, and eating bacon and hot 
roll, in (if i may be allowed the expression) a gorging and 
gormandising manner. 
for such reasons i was very glad when ten o'clock came and we 
started for miss havisham's; though i was not at all at my ease 
regarding the manner in which i should acquit myself under that 
lady's roof. within a quarter of an hour we came to miss havisham's 
house, which was of old brick, and dismal, and had a great many 
iron bars to it. some of the windows had been walled up; of those 
that remained, all the lower were rustily barred. there was a 
court-yard in front, and that was barred; so, we had to wait, after 
ringing the bell, until some one should come to open it. while we 
waited at the gate, i peeped in (even then mr. pumblechook said, 
"and fourteen?" but i pretended not to hear him), and saw that at 
the side of the house there was a large brewery. no brewing was going 
on in it, and none seemed to have gone on for a long long time. 
a window was raised, and a clear voice demanded "what name?" to 
which my conductor replied, "pumblechook." the voice returned, 
"quite right," and the window was shut again, and a young lady came 
across the court-yard, with keys in her hand. 
"this," said mr. pumblechook, "is pip." 
"this is pip, is it?" returned the young lady, who was very pretty 
and seemed very proud; "come in, pip." 
mr. pumblechook was coming in also, when she stopped him with the 
gate. 
"oh!" she said. "did you wish to see miss havisham?" 
"if miss havisham wished to see me," returned mr. pumblechook, 
discomfited. 
"ah!" said the girl; "but you see she don't." 
she said it so finally, and in such an undiscussible way, that mr. 
pumblechook, though in a condition of ruffled dignity, could not 
protest. but he eyed me severely - as if i had done anything to 
him! - and departed with the words reproachfully delivered: "boy! 
let your behaviour here be a credit unto them which brought you up 
by hand!" i was not free from apprehension that he would come back 
to propound through the gate, "and sixteen?" but he didn't. 
my young conductress locked the gate, and we went across the 
court-yard. it was paved and clean, but grass was growing in every 
crevice. the brewery buildings had a little lane of communication 
with it, and the wooden gates of that lane stood open, and all the 
brewery beyond, stood open, away to the high enclosing wall; and 
all was empty and disused. the cold wind seemed to blow colder 
there, than outside the gate; and it made a shrill noise in howling 
in and out at the open sides of the brewery, like the noise of wind 
in the rigging of a ship at sea. 
she saw me looking at it, and she said, "you could drink without 
hurt all the strong beer that's brewed there now, boy." 
"i should think i could, miss," said i, in a shy way. 
"better not try to brew beer there now, or it would turn out sour, 
boy; don't you think so?" 
"it looks like it, miss." 
"not that anybody means to try," she added, "for that's all done 
with, and the place will stand as idle as it is, till it falls. as 
to strong beer, there's enough of it in the cellars already, to 
drown the manor house." 
"is that the name of this house, miss?" 
"one of its names, boy." 
"it has more than one, then, miss?" 
"one more. its other name was satis; which is greek, or latin, or 
hebrew, or all three - or all one to me - for enough." 
"enough house," said i; "that's a curious name, miss." 
"yes," she replied; "but it meant more than it said. it meant, when 
it was given, that whoever had this house, could want nothing else. 
they must have been easily satisfied in those days, i should think. 
but don't loiter, boy." 
though she called me "boy" so often, and with a carelessness that 
was far from complimentary, she was of about my own age. she seemed 
much older than i, of course, being a girl, and beautiful and 
self-possessed; and she was as scornful of me as if she had been 
one-and-twenty, and a queen. 
we went into the house by a side door - the great front entrance 
had two chains across it outside - and the first thing i noticed 
was, that the passages were all dark, and that she had left a 
candle burning there. she took it up, and we went through more 
passages and up a staircase, and still it was all dark, and only 
the candle lighted us. 
at last we came to the door of a room, and she said, "go in." 
i answered, more in shyness than politeness, "after you, miss." 
to this, she returned: "don't be ridiculous, boy; i am not going 
in." and scornfully walked away, and - what was worse - took the 
candle with her. 
this was very uncomfortable, and i was half afraid. however, the 
only thing to be done being to knock at the door, i knocked, and 
was told from within to enter. i entered, therefore, and found 
myself in a pretty large room, well lighted with wax candles. no 
glimpse of daylight was to be seen in it. it was a dressing-room, 
as i supposed from the furniture, though much of it was of forms 
and uses then quite unknown to me. but prominent in it was a draped 
table with a gilded looking-glass, and that i made out at first 
sight to be a fine lady's dressing-table. 
whether i should have made out this object so soon, if there had 
been no fine lady sitting at it, i cannot say. in an arm-chair, 
with an elbow resting on the table and her head leaning on that 
hand, sat the strangest lady i have ever seen, or shall ever see. 
she was dressed in rich materials - satins, and lace, and silks - 
all of white. her shoes were white. and she had a long white veil 
dependent from her hair, and she had bridal flowers in her hair, 
but her hair was white. some bright jewels sparkled on her neck and 
on her hands, and some other jewels lay sparkling on the table. 
dresses, less splendid than the dress she wore, and half-packed 
trunks, were scattered about. she had not quite finished dressing, 
for she had but one shoe on - the other was on the table near her 
hand - her veil was but half arranged, her watch and chain were not 
put on, and some lace for her bosom lay with those trinkets, and 
with her handkerchief, and gloves, and some flowers, and a 
prayer-book, all confusedly heaped about the looking-glass. 
it was not in the first few moments that i saw all these things, 
though i saw more of them in the first moments than might be 
supposed. but, i saw that everything within my view which ought to 
be white, had been white long ago, and had lost its lustre, and was 
faded and yellow. i saw that the bride within the bridal dress had 
withered like the dress, and like the flowers, and had no 
brightness left but the brightness of her sunken eyes. i saw that 
the dress had been put upon the rounded figure of a young woman, 
and that the figure upon which it now hung loose, had shrunk to 
skin and bone. once, i had been taken to see some ghastly waxwork 
at the fair, representing i know not what impossible personage 
lying in state. once, i had been taken to one of our old marsh 
churches to see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress, that had 
been dug out of a vault under the church pavement. now, waxwork and 
skeleton seemed to have dark eyes that moved and looked at me. i 
should have cried out, if i could. 
"who is it?" said the lady at the table. 
"pip, ma'am." 
"pip?" 
"mr. pumblechook's boy, ma'am. come - to play." 
"come nearer; let me look at you. come close." 
it was when i stood before her, avoiding her eyes, that i took note 
of the surrounding objects in detail, and saw that her watch had 
stopped at twenty minutes to nine, and that a clock in the room had 
stopped at twenty minutes to nine. 
"look at me," said miss havisham. "you are not afraid of a woman 
who has never seen the sun since you were born?" 
i regret to state that i was not afraid of telling the enormous lie 
comprehended in the answer "no." 
"do you know what i touch here?" she said, laying her hands, one 
upon the other, on her left side. 
"yes, ma'am." (it made me think of the young man.) 
"what do i touch?" 
"your heart." 
"broken!" 
she uttered the word with an eager look, and with strong emphasis, 
and with a weird smile that had a kind of boast in it. afterwards, 
she kept her hands there for a little while, and slowly took them 
away as if they were heavy. 
"i am tired," said miss havisham. "i want diversion, and i have 
done with men and women. play." 
i think it will be conceded by my most disputatious reader, that 
she could hardly have directed an unfortunate boy to do anything in 
the wide world more difficult to be done under the circumstances. 
"i sometimes have sick fancies," she went on, "and i have a sick 
fancy that i want to see some play. there there!" with an impatient 
movement of the fingers of her right hand; "play, play, play!" 
for a moment, with the fear of my sister's working me before my 
eyes, i had a desperate idea of starting round the room in the 
assumed character of mr. pumblechook's chaise-cart. but, i felt 
myself so unequal to the performance that i gave it up, and stood 
looking at miss havisham in what i suppose she took for a dogged 
manner, inasmuch as she said, when we had taken a good look at each 
other: 
"are you sullen and obstinate?" 
"no, ma'am, i am very sorry for you, and very sorry i can't play 
just now. if you complain of me i shall get into trouble with my 
sister, so i would do it if i could; but it's so new here, and so 
strange, and so fine - and melancholy-." i stopped, fearing i might 
say too much, or had already said it, and we took another look at 
each other. 
before she spoke again, she turned her eyes from me, and looked at 
the dress she wore, and at the dressing-table, and finally at 
herself in the looking-glass. 
"so new to him," she muttered, "so old to me; so strange to him, so 
familiar to me; so melancholy to both of us! call estella." 
as she was still looking at the reflection of herself, i thought 
she was still talking to herself, and kept quiet. 
"call estella," she repeated, flashing a look at me. "you can do 
that. call estella. at the door." 
to stand in the dark in a mysterious passage of an unknown house, 
bawling estella to a scornful young lady neither visible nor 
responsive, and feeling it a dreadful liberty so to roar out her 
name, was almost as bad as playing to order. but, she answered at 
last, and her light came along the dark passage like a star. 
miss havisham beckoned her to come close, and took up a jewel from 
the table, and tried its effect upon her fair young bosom and 
against her pretty brown hair. "your own, one day, my dear, and you 
will use it well. let me see you play cards with this boy." 
"with this boy? why, he is a common labouring-boy!" 
i thought i overheard miss havisham answer - only it seemed so 
unlikely - "well? you can break his heart." 
"what do you play, boy?" asked estella of myself, with the greatest 
disdain. 
"nothing but beggar my neighbour, miss." 
"beggar him," said miss havisham to estella. so we sat down to 
cards. 
it was then i began to understand that everything in the room had 
stopped, like the watch and the clock, a long time ago. i noticed 
that miss havisham put down the jewel exactly on the spot from 
which she had taken it up. as estella dealt the cards, i glanced at 
the dressing-table again, and saw that the shoe upon it, once 
white, now yellow, had never been worn. i glanced down at the foot 
from which the shoe was absent, and saw that the silk stocking on 
it, once white, now yellow, had been trodden ragged. without this 
arrest of everything, this standing still of all the pale decayed 
objects, not even the withered bridal dress on the collapsed from 
could have looked so like grave-clothes, or the long veil so like a 
shroud. 
so she sat, corpse-like, as we played at cards; the frillings and 
trimmings on her bridal dress, looking like earthy paper. i knew 
nothing then, of the discoveries that are occasionally made of 
bodies buried in ancient times, which fall to powder in the moment 
of being distinctly seen; but, i have often thought since, that she 
must have looked as if the admission of the natural light of day 
would have struck her to dust. 
"he calls the knaves, jacks, this boy!" said estella with disdain, 
before our first game was out. "and what coarse hands he has! and 
what thick boots!" 
i had never thought of being ashamed of my hands before; but i 
began to consider them a very indifferent pair. her contempt for me 
was so strong, that it became infectious, and i caught it. 
she won the game, and i dealt. i misdealt, as was only natural, 
when i knew she was lying in wait for me to do wrong; and she 
denounced me for a stupid, clumsy labouring-boy. 
"you say nothing of her," remarked miss havisham to me, as she 
looked on. "she says many hard things of you, but you say nothing 
of her. what do you think of her?" 
"i don't like to say," i stammered. 
"tell me in my ear," said miss havisham, bending down. 
"i think she is very proud," i replied, in a whisper. 
"anything else?" 
"i think she is very pretty." 
"anything else?" 
"i think she is very insulting." (she was looking at me then with a 
look of supreme aversion.) 
"anything else?" 
"i think i should like to go home." 
"and never see her again, though she is so pretty?" 
"i am not sure that i shouldn't like to see her again, but i should 
like to go home now." 
"you shall go soon," said miss havisham, aloud. "play the game 
out." 
saving for the one weird smile at first, i should have felt almost 
sure that miss havisham's face could not smile. it had dropped into 
a watchful and brooding expression - most likely when all the 
things about her had become transfixed - and it looked as if 
nothing could ever lift it up again. her chest had dropped, so that 
she stooped; and her voice had dropped, so that she spoke low, and 
with a dead lull upon her; altogether, she had the appearance of 
having dropped, body and soul, within and without, under the weight 
of a crushing blow. 
i played the game to an end with estella, and she beggared me. she 
threw the cards down on the table when she had won them all, as if 
she despised them for having been won of me. 
"when shall i have you here again?" said miss havisham. "let me 
think." 
i was beginning to remind her that to-day was wednesday, when she 
checked me with her former impatient movement of the fingers of her 
right hand. 
"there, there! i know nothing of days of the week; i know nothing 
of weeks of the year. come again after six days. you hear?" 
"yes, ma'am." 
"estella, take him down. let him have something to eat, and let him 
roam and look about him while he eats. go, pip." 
i followed the candle down, as i had followed the candle up, and 
she stood it in the place where we had found it. until she opened 
the side entrance, i had fancied, without thinking about it, that 
it must necessarily be night-time. the rush of the daylight quite 
confounded me, and made me feel as if i had been in the candlelight 
of the strange room many hours. 
"you are to wait here, you boy," said estella; and disappeared and 
closed the door. 
i took the opportunity of being alone in the court-yard, to look at 
my coarse hands and my common boots. my opinion of those 
accessories was not favourable. they had never troubled me before, 
but they troubled me now, as vulgar appendages. i determined to ask 
joe why he had ever taught me to call those picture-cards, jacks, 
which ought to be called knaves. i wished joe had been rather more 
genteelly brought up, and then i should have been so too. 
she came back, with some bread and meat and a little mug of beer. 
she put the mug down on the stones of the yard, and gave me the 
bread and meat without looking at me, as insolently as if i were a 
dog in disgrace. i was so humiliated, hurt, spurned, offended, 
angry, sorry - i cannot hit upon the right name for the smart - god 
knows what its name was - that tears started to my eyes. the moment 
they sprang there, the girl looked at me with a quick delight in 
having been the cause of them. this gave me power to keep them back 
and to look at her: so, she gave a contemptuous toss - but with a 
sense, i thought, of having made too sure that i was so wounded - 
and left me. 
but, when she was gone, i looked about me for a place to hide my 
face in, and got behind one of the gates in the brewery-lane, and 
leaned my sleeve against the wall there, and leaned my forehead on 
it and cried. as i cried, i kicked the wall, and took a hard twist 
at my hair; so bitter were my feelings, and so sharp was the smart 
without a name, that needed counteraction. 
my sister's bringing up had made me sensitive. in the little world 
in which children have their existence whosoever brings them up, 
there is nothing so finely perceived and so finely felt, as 
injustice. it may be only small injustice that the child can be 
exposed to; but the child is small, and its world is small, and its 
rocking-horse stands as many hands high, according to scale, as a 
big-boned irish hunter. within myself, i had sustained, from my 
babyhood, a perpetual conflict with injustice. i had known, from 
the time when i could speak, that my sister, in her capricious and 
violent coercion, was unjust to me. i had cherished a profound 
conviction that her bringing me up by hand, gave her no right to 
bring me up by jerks. through all my punishments, disgraces, fasts 
and vigils, and other penitential performances, i had nursed this 
assurance; and to my communing so much with it, in a solitary and 
unprotected way, i in great part refer the fact that i was morally 
timid and very sensitive. 
i got rid of my injured feelings for the time, by kicking them into 
the brewery wall, and twisting them out of my hair, and then i 
smoothed my face with my sleeve, and came from behind the gate. the 
bread and meat were acceptable, and the beer was warming and 
tingling, and i was soon in spirits to look about me. 
to be sure, it was a deserted place, down to the pigeon-house in 
the brewery-yard, which had been blown crooked on its pole by some 
high wind, and would have made the pigeons think themselves at sea, 
if there had been any pigeons there to be rocked by it. but, there 
were no pigeons in the dove-cot, no horses in the stable, no pigs 
in the sty, no malt in the store-house, no smells of grains and 
beer in the copper or the vat. all the uses and scents of the 
brewery might have evaporated with its last reek of smoke. in a 
by-yard, there was a wilderness of empty casks, which had a certain 
sour remembrance of better days lingering about them; but it was 
too sour to be accepted as a sample of the beer that was gone - and 
in this respect i remember those recluses as being like most 
others. 
behind the furthest end of the brewery, was a rank garden with an 
old wall: not so high but that i could struggle up and hold on long 
enough to look over it, and see that the rank garden was the garden 
of the house, and that it was overgrown with tangled weeds, but 
that there was a track upon the green and yellow paths, as if some 
one sometimes walked there, and that estella was walking away from 
me even then. but she seemed to be everywhere. for, when i yielded 
to the temptation presented by the casks, and began to walk on 
them. i saw her walking on them at the end of the yard of casks. 
she had her back towards me, and held her pretty brown hair spread 
out in her two hands, and never looked round, and passed out of my 
view directly. so, in the brewery itself - by which i mean the 
large paved lofty place in which they used to make the beer, and 
where the brewing utensils still were. when i first went into it, 
and, rather oppressed by its gloom, stood near the door looking 
about me, i saw her pass among the extinguished fires, and ascend 
some light iron stairs, and go out by a gallery high overhead, as 
if she were going out into the sky. 
it was in this place, and at this moment, that a strange thing 
happened to my fancy. i thought it a strange thing then, and i 
thought it a stranger thing long afterwards. i turned my eyes - a 
little dimmed by looking up at the frosty light - towards a great 
wooden beam in a low nook of the building near me on my right hand, 
and i saw a figure hanging there by the neck. a figure all in 
yellow white, with but one shoe to the feet; and it hung so, that i 
could see that the faded trimmings of the dress were like earthy 
paper, and that the face was miss havisham's, with a movement going 
over the whole countenance as if she were trying to call to me. in 
the terror of seeing the figure, and in the terror of being certain 
that it had not been there a moment before, i at first ran from it, 
and then ran towards it. and my terror was greatest of all, when i 
found no figure there. 
nothing less than the frosty light of the cheerful sky, the sight 
of people passing beyond the bars of the court-yard gate, and the 
reviving influence of the rest of the bread and meat and beer, 
would have brought me round. even with those aids, i might not have 
come to myself as soon as i did, but that i saw estella approaching 
with the keys, to let me out. she would have some fair reason for 
looking down upon me, i thought, if she saw me frightened; and she 
would have no fair reason. 
she gave me a triumphant glance in passing me, as if she rejoiced 
that my hands were so coarse and my boots were so thick, and she 
opened the gate, and stood holding it. i was passing out without 
looking at her, when she touched me with a taunting hand. 
"why don't you cry?" 
"because i don't want to." 
"you do," said she. "you have been crying till you are half blind, 
and you are near crying again now." 
she laughed contemptuously, pushed me out, and locked the gate upon 
me. i went straight to mr. pumblechook's, and was immensely relieved 
to find him not at home. so, leaving word with the shopman on what 
day i was wanted at miss havisham's again, i set off on the 
four-mile walk to our forge; pondering, as i went along, on all i 
had seen, and deeply revolving that i was a common labouring-boy; 
that my hands were coarse; that my boots were thick; that i had 
fallen into a despicable habit of calling knaves jacks; that i was 
much more ignorant than i had considered myself last night, and 
generally that i was in a low-lived bad way. 
chapter 9 
when i reached home, my sister was very curious to know all about 
miss havisham's, and asked a number of questions. and i soon found 
myself getting heavily bumped from behind in the nape of the neck 
and the small of the back, and having my face ignominiously shoved 
against the kitchen wall, because i did not answer those questions 
at sufficient length. 
if a dread of not being understood be hidden in the breasts of 
other young people to anything like the extent to which it used to 
be hidden in mine - which i consider probable, as i have no 
particular reason to suspect myself of having been a monstrosity - 
it is the key to many reservations. i felt convinced that if i 
described miss havisham's as my eyes had seen it, i should not be 
understood. not only that, but i felt convinced that miss havisham 
too would not be understood; and although she was perfectly 
incomprehensible to me, i entertained an impression that there 
would be something coarse and treacherous in my dragging her as she 
really was (to say nothing of miss estella) before the 
contemplation of mrs. joe. consequently, i said as little as i 
could, and had my face shoved against the kitchen wall. 
the worst of it was that that bullying old pumblechook, preyed upon 
by a devouring curiosity to be informed of all i had seen and 
heard, came gaping over in his chaise-cart at tea-time, to have the 
details divulged to him. and the mere sight of the torment, with 
his fishy eyes and mouth open, his sandy hair inquisitively on end, 
and his waistcoat heaving with windy arithmetic, made me vicious in 
my reticence. 
"well, boy," uncle pumblechook began, as soon as he was seated in 
the chair of honour by the fire. "how did you get on up town?" 
i answered, "pretty well, sir," and my sister shook her fist at me. 
"pretty well?" mr. pumblechook repeated. "pretty well is no answer. 
tell us what you mean by pretty well, boy?" 
whitewash on the forehead hardens the brain into a state of 
obstinacy perhaps. anyhow, with whitewash from the wall on my 
forehead, my obstinacy was adamantine. i reflected for some time, 
and then answered as if i had discovered a new idea, "i mean pretty 
well." 
my sister with an exclamation of impatience was going to fly at me 
i had no shadow of defence, for joe was busy in the forge when mr. 
pumblechook interposed with "no! don't lose your temper. leave this 
lad to me, ma'am; leave this lad to me." mr. pumblechook then turned 
me towards him, as if he were going to cut my hair, and said: 
"first (to get our thoughts in order): forty-three pence?" 
i calculated the consequences of replying "four hundred pound," and 
finding them against me, went as near the answer as i could - which 
was somewhere about eightpence off. mr. pumblechook then put me 
through my pence-table from "twelve pence make one shilling," up to 
"forty pence make three and fourpence," and then triumphantly 
demanded, as if he had done for me, "now! how much is forty-three 
pence?" to which i replied, after a long interval of reflection, "i 
don't know." and i was so aggravated that i almost doubt if i did 
know. 
mr. pumblechook worked his head like a screw to screw it out of me, 
and said, "is forty-three pence seven and sixpence three fardens, 
for instance?" 
"yes!" said i. and although my sister instantly boxed my ears, it 
was highly gratifying to me to see that the answer spoilt his joke, 
and brought him to a dead stop. 
"boy! what like is miss havisham?" mr. pumblechook began again when 
he had recovered; folding his arms tight on his chest and applying 
the screw. 
"very tall and dark," i told him. 
"is she, uncle?" asked my sister. 
mr. pumblechook winked assent; from which i at once inferred that he 
had never seen miss havisham, for she was nothing of the kind. 
"good!" said mr. pumblechook conceitedly. ("this is the way to have 
him! we are beginning to hold our own, i think, mum?") 
"i am sure, uncle," returned mrs. joe, "i wish you had him always: 
you know so well how to deal with him." 
"now, boy! what was she a-doing of, when you went in today?" asked 
mr. pumblechook. 
"she was sitting," i answered, "in a black velvet coach." 
mr. pumblechook and mrs. joe stared at one another - as they well 
might - and both repeated, "in a black velvet coach?" 
"yes," said i. "and miss estella - that's her niece, i think - 
handed her in cake and wine at the coach-window, on a gold plate. 
and we all had cake and wine on gold plates. and i got up behind 
the coach to eat mine, because she told me to." 
"was anybody else there?" asked mr. pumblechook. 
"four dogs," said i. 
"large or small?" 
"immense," said i. "and they fought for veal cutlets out of a 
silver basket." 
mr. pumblechook and mrs. joe stared at one another again, in utter 
amazement. i was perfectly frantic - a reckless witness under the 
torture - and would have told them anything. 
"where was this coach, in the name of gracious?" asked my sister. 
"in miss havisham's room." they stared again. "but there weren't 
any horses to it." i added this saving clause, in the moment of 
rejecting four richly caparisoned coursers which i had had wild 
thoughts of harnessing. 
"can this be possible, uncle?" asked mrs. joe. "what can the boy 
mean?" 
"i'll tell you, mum," said mr. pumblechook. "my opinion is, it's a 
sedan-chair. she's flighty, you know - very flighty - quite flighty 
enough to pass her days in a sedan-chair." 
"did you ever see her in it, uncle?" asked mrs. joe. 
"how could i," he returned, forced to the admission, "when i never 
see her in my life? never clapped eyes upon her!" 
"goodness, uncle! and yet you have spoken to her?" 
"why, don't you know," said mr. pumblechook, testily, "that when i 
have been there, i have been took up to the outside of her door, 
and the door has stood ajar, and she has spoke to me that way. 
don't say you don't know that, mum. howsever, the boy went there to 
play. what did you play at, boy?" 
"we played with flags," i said. (i beg to observe that i think of 
myself with amazement, when i recall the lies i told on this 
occasion.) 
"flags!" echoed my sister. 
"yes," said i. "estella waved a blue flag, and i waved a red one, 
and miss havisham waved one sprinkled all over with little gold 
stars, out at the coach-window. and then we all waved our swords 
and hurrahed." 
"swords!" repeated my sister. "where did you get swords from?" 
"out of a cupboard," said i. "and i saw pistols in it - and jam - 
and pills. and there was no daylight in the room, but it was all 
lighted up with candles." 
"that's true, mum," said mr. pumblechook, with a grave nod. "that's 
the state of the case, for that much i've seen myself." and then 
they both stared at me, and i, with an obtrusive show of 
artlessness on my countenance, stared at them, and plaited the 
right leg of my trousers with my right hand. 
if they had asked me any more questions i should undoubtedly have 
betrayed myself, for i was even then on the point of mentioning 
that there was a balloon in the yard, and should have hazarded the 
statement but for my invention being divided between that 
phenomenon and a bear in the brewery. they were so much occupied, 
however, in discussing the marvels i had already presented for 
their consideration, that i escaped. the subject still held them 
when joe came in from his work to have a cup of tea. to whom my 
sister, more for the relief of her own mind than for the 
gratification of his, related my pretended experiences. 
now, when i saw joe open his blue eyes and roll them all round the 
kitchen in helpless amazement, i was overtaken by penitence; but 
only as regarded him - not in the least as regarded the other two. 
towards joe, and joe only, i considered myself a young monster, 
while they sat debating what results would come to me from miss 
havisham's acquaintance and favour. they had no doubt that miss 
havisham would "do something" for me; their doubts related to the 
form that something would take. my sister stood out for "property." 
mr. pumblechook was in favour of a handsome premium for binding me 
apprentice to some genteel trade - say, the corn and seed trade, 
for instance. joe fell into the deepest disgrace with both, for 
offering the bright suggestion that i might only be presented with 
one of the dogs who had fought for the veal-cutlets. "if a fool's 
head can't express better opinions than that," said my sister, "and 
you have got any work to do, you had better go and do it." so he 
went. 
after mr. pumblechook had driven off, and when my sister was washing 
up, i stole into the forge to joe, and remained by him until he had 
done for the night. then i said, "before the fire goes out, joe, i 
should like to tell you something." 
"should you, pip?" said joe, drawing his shoeing-stool near the 
forge. "then tell us. what is it, pip?" 
"joe," said i, taking hold of his rolled-up shirt sleeve, and 
twisting it between my finger and thumb, "you remember all that 
about miss havisham's?" 
"remember?" said joe. "i believe you! wonderful!" 
"it's a terrible thing, joe; it ain't true." 
"what are you telling of, pip?" cried joe, falling back in the 
greatest amazement. "you don't mean to say it's-" 
"yes i do; it's lies, joe." 
"but not all of it? why sure you don't mean to say, pip, that there 
was no black welwet coach?" for, i stood shaking my head. "but at 
least there was dogs, pip? come, pip," said joe, persuasively, "if 
there warn't no weal-cutlets, at least there was dogs?" 
"no, joe." 
"a dog?" said joe. "a puppy? come?" 
"no, joe, there was nothing at all of the kind." 
as i fixed my eyes hopelessly on joe, joe contemplated me in 
dismay. "pip, old chap! this won't do, old fellow! i say! where do 
you expect to go to?" 
"it's terrible, joe; an't it?" 
"terrible?" cried joe. "awful! what possessed you?" 
"i don't know what possessed me, joe," i replied, letting his shirt 
sleeve go, and sitting down in the ashes at his feet, hanging my 
head; "but i wish you hadn't taught me to call knaves at cards, 
jacks; and i wish my boots weren't so thick nor my hands so 
coarse." 
and then i told joe that i felt very miserable, and that i hadn't 
been able to explain myself to mrs. joe and pumblechook who were so 
rude to me, and that there had been a beautiful young lady at miss 
havisham's who was dreadfully proud, and that she had said i was 
common, and that i knew i was common, and that i wished i was not 
common, and that the lies had come of it somehow, though i didn't 
know how. 
this was a case of metaphysics, at least as difficult for joe to 
deal with, as for me. but joe took the case altogether out of the 
region of metaphysics, and by that means vanquished it. 
"there's one thing you may be sure of, pip," said joe, after some 
rumination, "namely, that lies is lies. howsever they come, they 
didn't ought to come, and they come from the father of lies, and 
work round to the same. don't you tell no more of 'em, pip. that 
ain't the way to get out of being common, old chap. and as to being 
common, i don't make it out at all clear. you are oncommon in some 
things. you're oncommon small. likewise you're a oncommon scholar." 
"no, i am ignorant and backward, joe." 
"why, see what a letter you wrote last night! wrote in print even! 
i've seen letters - ah! and from gentlefolks! - that i'll swear 
weren't wrote in print," said joe. 
"i have learnt next to nothing, joe. you think much of me. it's 
only that." 
"well, pip," said joe, "be it so or be it son't, you must be a 
common scholar afore you can be a oncommon one, i should hope! the 
king upon his throne, with his crown upon his 'ed, can't sit and 
write his acts of parliament in print, without having begun, when 
he were a unpromoted prince, with the alphabet - ah!" added joe, 
with a shake of the head that was full of meaning, "and begun at a 
too, and worked his way to z. and i know what that is to do, though 
i can't say i've exactly done it." 
there was some hope in this piece of wisdom, and it rather 
encouraged me. 
"whether common ones as to callings and earnings," pursued joe, 
reflectively, "mightn't be the better of continuing for a keep 
company with common ones, instead of going out to play with 
oncommon ones - which reminds me to hope that there were a flag, 
perhaps?" 
"no, joe." 
"(i'm sorry there weren't a flag, pip). whether that might be, or 
mightn't be, is a thing as can't be looked into now, without 
putting your sister on the rampage; and that's a thing not to be 
thought of, as being done intentional. lookee here, pip, at what is 
said to you by a true friend. which this to you the true friend 
say. if you can't get to be oncommon through going straight, you'll 
never get to do it through going crooked. so don't tell no more on 
'em, pip, and live well and die happy." 
"you are not angry with me, joe?" 
"no, old chap. but bearing in mind that them were which i 
meantersay of a stunning and outdacious sort - alluding to them 
which bordered on weal-cutlets and dog-fighting - a sincere 
wellwisher would adwise, pip, their being dropped into your 
meditations, when you go up-stairs to bed. that's all, old chap, 
and don't never do it no more." 
when i got up to my little room and said my prayers, i did not 
forget joe's recommendation, and yet my young mind was in that 
disturbed and unthankful state, that i thought long after i laid me 
down, how common estella would consider joe, a mere blacksmith: how 
thick his boots, and how coarse his hands. i thought how joe and my 
sister were then sitting in the kitchen, and how i had come up to 
bed from the kitchen, and how miss havisham and estella never sat 
in a kitchen, but were far above the level of such common doings. i 
fell asleep recalling what i "used to do" when i was at miss 
havisham's; as though i had been there weeks or months, instead of 
hours; and as though it were quite an old subject of remembrance, 
instead of one that had arisen only that day. 
that was a memorable day to me, for it made great changes in me. 
but, it is the same with any life. imagine one selected day struck 
out of it, and think how different its course would have been. 
pause you who read this, and think for a moment of the long chain 
of iron or gold, of thorns or flowers, that would never have bound 
you, but for the formation of the first link on one memorable day. 
chapter 10 
the felicitous idea occurred to me a morning or two later when i 
woke, that the best step i could take towards making myself 
uncommon was to get out of biddy everything she knew. in pursuance 
of this luminous conception i mentioned to biddy when i went to mr. 
wopsle's great-aunt's at night, that i had a particular reason for 
wishing to get on in life, and that i should feel very much obliged 
to her if she would impart all her learning to me. biddy, who was 
the most obliging of girls, immediately said she would, and indeed 
began to carry out her promise within five minutes. 
the educational scheme or course established by mr. wopsle's 
great-aunt may be resolved into the following synopsis. the pupils 
ate apples and put straws down one another's backs, until mr 
wopsle's great-aunt collected her energies, and made an 
indiscriminate totter at them with a birch-rod. after receiving the 
charge with every mark of derision, the pupils formed in line and 
buzzingly passed a ragged book from hand to hand. the book had an 
alphabet in it, some figures and tables, and a little spelling - 
that is to say, it had had once. as soon as this volume began to 
circulate, mr. wopsle's great-aunt fell into a state of coma; 
arising either from sleep or a rheumatic paroxysm. the pupils then 
entered among themselves upon a competitive examination on the 
subject of boots, with the view of ascertaining who could tread the 
hardest upon whose toes. this mental exercise lasted until biddy 
made a rush at them and distributed three defaced bibles (shaped as 
if they had been unskilfully cut off the chump-end of something), 
more illegibly printed at the best than any curiosities of 
literature i have since met with, speckled all over with ironmould, 
and having various specimens of the insect world smashed between 
their leaves. this part of the course was usually lightened by 
several single combats between biddy and refractory students. when 
the fights were over, biddy gave out the number of a page, and then 
we all read aloud what we could - or what we couldn't - in a 
frightful chorus; biddy leading with a high shrill monotonous 
voice, and none of us having the least notion of, or reverence for, 
what we were reading about. when this horrible din had lasted a 
certain time, it mechanically awoke mr. wopsle's great-aunt, who 
staggered at a boy fortuitously, and pulled his ears. this was 
understood to terminate the course for the evening, and we emerged 
into the air with shrieks of intellectual victory. it is fair to 
remark that there was no prohibition against any pupil's 
entertaining himself with a slate or even with the ink (when there 
was any), but that it was not easy to pursue that branch of study 
in the winter season, on account of the little general shop in 
which the classes were holden - and which was also mr. wopsle's 
great-aunt's sitting-room and bed-chamber - being but faintly 
illuminated through the agency of one low-spirited dip-candle and 
no snuffers. 
it appeared to me that it would take time, to become uncommon under 
these circumstances: nevertheless, i resolved to try it, and that 
very evening biddy entered on our special agreement, by imparting 
some information from her little catalogue of prices, under the 
head of moist sugar, and lending me, to copy at home, a large old 
english d which she had imitated from the heading of some 
newspaper, and which i supposed, until she told me what it was, to 
be a design for a buckle. 
of course there was a public-house in the village, and of course 
joe liked sometimes to smoke his pipe there. i had received strict 
orders from my sister to call for him at the three jolly bargemen, 
that evening, on my way from school, and bring him home at my 
peril. to the three jolly bargemen, therefore, i directed my steps. 
there was a bar at the jolly bargemen, with some alarmingly long 
chalk scores in it on the wall at the side of the door, which 
seemed to me to be never paid off. they had been there ever since i 
could remember, and had grown more than i had. but there was a 
quantity of chalk about our country, and perhaps the people 
neglected no opportunity of turning it to account. 
it being saturday night, i found the landlord looking rather grimly 
at these records, but as my business was with joe and not with him, 
i merely wished him good evening, and passed into the common room 
at the end of the passage, where there was a bright large kitchen 
fire, and where joe was smoking his pipe in company with mr. wopsle 
and a stranger. joe greeted me as usual with "halloa, pip, old 
chap!" and the moment he said that, the stranger turned his head 
and looked at me. 
he was a secret-looking man whom i had never seen before. his head 
was all on one side, and one of his eyes was half shut up, as if he 
were taking aim at something with an invisible gun. he had a pipe 
in his mouth, and he took it out, and, after slowly blowing all his 
smoke away and looking hard at me all the time, nodded. so, i 
nodded, and then he nodded again, and made room on the settle 
beside him that i might sit down there. 
but, as i was used to sit beside joe whenever i entered that place 
of resort, i said "no, thank you, sir," and fell into the space joe 
made for me on the opposite settle. the strange man, after glancing 
at joe, and seeing that his attention was otherwise engaged, nodded 
to me again when i had taken my seat, and then rubbed his leg - in 
a very odd way, as it struck me. 
"you was saying," said the strange man, turning to joe, "that you 
was a blacksmith." 
"yes. i said it, you know," said joe. 
"what'll you drink, mr. - ? you didn't mention your name, 
by-the-bye." 
joe mentioned it now, and the strange man called him by it. 
"what'll you drink, mr. gargery? at my expense? to top up with?" 
"well," said joe, "to tell you the truth, i ain't much in the habit 
of drinking at anybody's expense but my own." 
"habit? no," returned the stranger, "but once and away, and on a 
saturday night too. come! put a name to it, mr. gargery." 
"i wouldn't wish to be stiff company," said joe. "rum." 
"rum," repeated the stranger. "and will the other gentleman 
originate a sentiment." 
"rum," said mr. wopsle. 
"three rums!" cried the stranger, calling to the landlord. "glasses 
round!" 
"this other gentleman," observed joe, by way of introducing mr. 
wopsle, "is a gentleman that you would like to hear give it out. 
our clerk at church." 
"aha!" said the stranger, quickly, and cocking his eye at me. "the 
lonely church, right out on the marshes, with graves round it!" 
"that's it," said joe. 
the stranger, with a comfortable kind of grunt over his pipe, put 
his legs up on the settle that he had to himself. he wore a 
flapping broad-brimmed traveller's hat, and under it a handkerchief 
tied over his head in the manner of a cap: so that he showed no 
hair. as he looked at the fire, i thought i saw a cunning 
expression, followed by a half-laugh, come into his face. 
"i am not acquainted with this country, gentlemen, but it seems a 
solitary country towards the river." 
"most marshes is solitary," said joe. 
"no doubt, no doubt. do you find any gipsies, now, or tramps, or 
vagrants of any sort, out there?" 
"no," said joe; "none but a runaway convict now and then. and we 
don't find them, easy. eh, mr. wopsle?" 
mr. wopsle, with a majestic remembrance of old discomfiture, 
assented; but not warmly. 
"seems you have been out after such?" asked the stranger. 
"once," returned joe. "not that we wanted to take them, you 
understand; we went out as lookers on; me, and mr. wopsle, and pip. 
didn't us, pip?" 
"yes, joe." 
the stranger looked at me again - still cocking his eye, as if he 
were expressly taking aim at me with his invisible gun - and said, 
"he's a likely young parcel of bones that. what is it you call 
him?" 
"pip," said joe. 
"christened pip?" 
"no, not christened pip." 
"surname pip?" 
"no," said joe, "it's a kind of family name what he gave himself 
when a infant, and is called by." 
"son of yours?" 
"well," said joe, meditatively - not, of course, that it could be 
in anywise necessary to consider about it, but because it was the 
way at the jolly bargemen to seem to consider deeply about 
everything that was discussed over pipes; "well - no. no, he 
ain't." 
"nevvy?" said the strange man. 
"well," said joe, with the same appearance of profound cogitation, 
"he is not - no, not to deceive you, he is not - my nevvy." 
"what the blue blazes is he?" asked the stranger. which appeared to 
me to be an inquiry of unnecessary strength. 
mr. wopsle struck in upon that; as one who knew all about 
relationships, having professional occasion to bear in mind what 
female relations a man might not marry; and expounded the ties 
between me and joe. having his hand in, mr. wopsle finished off with 
a most terrifically snarling passage from richard the third, and 
seemed to think he had done quite enough to account for it when he 
added, - "as the poet says." 
and here i may remark that when mr. wopsle referred to me, he 
considered it a necessary part of such reference to rumple my hair 
and poke it into my eyes. i cannot conceive why everybody of his 
standing who visited at our house should always have put me through 
the same inflammatory process under similar circumstances. yet i do 
not call to mind that i was ever in my earlier youth the subject of 
remark in our social family circle, but some large-handed person 
took some such ophthalmic steps to patronize me. 
all this while, the strange man looked at nobody but me, and looked 
at me as if he were determined to have a shot at me at last, and 
bring me down. but he said nothing after offering his blue blazes 
observation, until the glasses of rum-and-water were brought; and 
then he made his shot, and a most extraordinary shot it was. 
it was not a verbal remark, but a proceeding in dump show, and was 
pointedly addressed to me. he stirred his rum-and-water pointedly 
at me, and he tasted his rum-and-water pointedly at me. and he 
stirred it and he tasted it: not with a spoon that was brought to 
him, but with a file. 
he did this so that nobody but i saw the file; and when he had done 
it he wiped the file and put it in a breast-pocket. i knew it to be 
joe's file, and i knew that he knew my convict, the moment i saw 
the instrument. i sat gazing at him, spell-bound. but he now 
reclined on his settle, taking very little notice of me, and 
talking principally about turnips. 
there was a delicious sense of cleaning-up and making a quiet pause 
before going on in life afresh, in our village on saturday nights, 
which stimulated joe to dare to stay out half an hour longer on 
saturdays than at other times. the half hour and the rum-and-water 
running out together, joe got up to go, and took me by the hand. 
"stop half a moment, mr. gargery," said the strange man. "i think 
i've got a bright new shilling somewhere in my pocket, and if i 
have, the boy shall have it." 
he looked it out from a handful of small change, folded it in some 
crumpled paper, and gave it to me. "yours!" said he. "mind! your 
own." 
i thanked him, staring at him far beyond the bounds of good 
manners, and holding tight to joe. he gave joe good-night, and he 
gave mr. wopsle good-night (who went out with us), and he gave me 
only a look with his aiming eye - no, not a look, for he shut it 
up, but wonders may be done with an eye by hiding it. 
on the way home, if i had been in a humour for talking, the talk 
must have been all on my side, for mr. wopsle parted from us at the 
door of the jolly bargemen, and joe went all the way home with his 
mouth wide open, to rinse the rum out with as much air as possible. 
but i was in a manner stupefied by this turning up of my old 
misdeed and old acquaintance, and could think of nothing else. 
my sister was not in a very bad temper when we presented ourselves 
in the kitchen, and joe was encouraged by that unusual circumstance 
to tell her about the bright shilling. "a bad un, i'll be bound," 
said mrs. joe triumphantly, "or he wouldn't have given it to the 
boy! let's look at it." 
i took it out of the paper, and it proved to be a good one. "but 
what's this?" said mrs. joe, throwing down the shilling and catching 
up the paper. "two one-pound notes?" 
nothing less than two fat sweltering one-pound notes that seemed to 
have been on terms of the warmest intimacy with all the cattle 
markets in the county. joe caught up his hat again, and ran with 
them to the jolly bargemen to restore them to their owner. while he 
was gone, i sat down on my usual stool and looked vacantly at my 
sister, feeling pretty sure that the man would not be there. 
presently, joe came back, saying that the man was gone, but that 
he, joe, had left word at the three jolly bargemen concerning the 
notes. then my sister sealed them up in a piece of paper, and put 
them under some dried rose-leaves in an ornamental tea-pot on the 
top of a press in the state parlour. there they remained, a 
nightmare to me, many and many a night and day. 
i had sadly broken sleep when i got to bed, through thinking of the 
strange man taking aim at me with his invisible gun, and of the 
guiltily coarse and common thing it was, to be on secret terms of 
conspiracy with convicts - a feature in my low career that i had 
previously forgotten. i was haunted by the file too. a dread 
possessed me that when i least expected it, the file would 
reappear. i coaxed myself to sleep by thinking of miss havisham's, 
next wednesday; and in my sleep i saw the file coming at me out of 
a door, without seeing who held it, and i screamed myself awake. 
chapter 11 
at the appointed time i returned to miss havisham's, and my 
hesitating ring at the gate brought out estella. she locked it 
after admitting me, as she had done before, and again preceded me 
into the dark passage where her candle stood. she took no notice of 
me until she had the candle in her hand, when she looked over her 
shoulder, superciliously saying, "you are to come this way today," 
and took me to quite another part of the house. 
the passage was a long one, and seemed to pervade the whole square 
basement of the manor house. we traversed but one side of the 
square, however, and at the end of it she stopped, and put her 
candle down and opened a door. here, the daylight reappeared, and i 
found myself in a small paved court-yard, the opposite side of 
which was formed by a detached dwelling-house, that looked as if it 
had once belonged to the manager or head clerk of the extinct 
brewery. there was a clock in the outer wall of this house. like 
the clock in miss havisham's room, and like miss havisham's watch, 
it had stopped at twenty minutes to nine. 
we went in at the door, which stood open, and into a gloomy room 
with a low ceiling, on the ground floor at the back. there was some 
company in the room, and estella said to me as she joined it, "you 
are to go and stand there, boy, till you are wanted." "there", 
being the window, i crossed to it, and stood "there," in a very 
uncomfortable state of mind, looking out. 
it opened to the ground, and looked into a most miserable corner of 
the neglected garden, upon a rank ruin of cabbage-stalks, and one 
box tree that had been clipped round long ago, like a pudding, and 
had a new growth at the top of it, out of shape and of a different 
colour, as if that part of the pudding had stuck to the saucepan 
and got burnt. this was my homely thought, as i contemplated the 
box-tree. there had been some light snow, overnight, and it lay 
nowhere else to my knowledge; but, it had not quite melted from the 
cold shadow of this bit of garden, and the wind caught it up in 
little eddies and threw it at the window, as if it pelted me for 
coming there. 
i divined that my coming had stopped conversation in the room, and 
that its other occupants were looking at me. i could see nothing of 
the room except the shining of the fire in the window glass, but i 
stiffened in all my joints with the consciousness that i was under 
close inspection. 
there were three ladies in the room and one gentleman. before i had 
been standing at the window five minutes, they somehow conveyed to 
me that they were all toadies and humbugs, but that each of them 
pretended not to know that the others were toadies and humbugs: 
because the admission that he or she did know it, would have made 
him or her out to be a toady and humbug. 
they all had a listless and dreary air of waiting somebody's 
pleasure, and the most talkative of the ladies had to speak quite 
rigidly to repress a yawn. this lady, whose name was camilla, very 
much reminded me of my sister, with the difference that she was 
older, and (as i found when i caught sight of her) of a blunter 
cast of features. indeed, when i knew her better i began to think 
it was a mercy she had any features at all, so very blank and high 
was the dead wall of her face. 
"poor dear soul!" said this lady, with an abruptness of manner 
quite my sister's. "nobody's enemy but his own!" 
"it would be much more commendable to be somebody else's enemy," 
said the gentleman; "far more natural." 
"cousin raymond," observed another lady, "we are to love our 
neighbour." 
"sarah pocket," returned cousin raymond, "if a man is not his own 
neighbour, who is?" 
miss pocket laughed, and camilla laughed and said (checking a 
yawn), "the idea!" but i thought they seemed to think it rather a 
good idea too. the other lady, who had not spoken yet, said gravely 
and emphatically, "very true!" 
"poor soul!" camilla presently went on (i knew they had all been 
looking at me in the mean time), "he is so very strange! would 
anyone believe that when tom's wife died, he actually could not be 
induced to see the importance of the children's having the deepest 
of trimmings to their mourning? 'good lord!' says he, 'camilla, 
what can it signify so long as the poor bereaved little things are 
in black?' so like matthew! the idea!" 
"good points in him, good points in him," said cousin raymond; 
"heaven forbid i should deny good points in him; but he never had, 
and he never will have, any sense of the proprieties." 
"you know i was obliged," said camilla, "i was obliged to be firm. 
i said, 'it will not do, for the credit of the family.' i told him 
that, without deep trimmings, the family was disgraced. i cried 
about it from breakfast till dinner. i injured my digestion. and at 
last he flung out in his violent way, and said, with a d, 'then do 
as you like.' thank goodness it will always be a consolation to me 
to know that i instantly went out in a pouring rain and bought the 
things." 
"he paid for them, did he not?" asked estella. 
"it's not the question, my dear child, who paid for them," returned 
camilla. "i bought them. and i shall often think of that with 
peace, when i wake up in the night." 
the ringing of a distant bell, combined with the echoing of some 
cry or call along the passage by which i had come, interrupted the 
conversation and caused estella to say to me, "now, boy!" on my 
turning round, they all looked at me with the utmost contempt, and, 
as i went out, i heard sarah pocket say, "well i am sure! what 
next!" and camilla add, with indignation, "was there ever such a 
fancy! the i-de-a!" 
as we were going with our candle along the dark passage, estella 
stopped all of a sudden, and, facing round, said in her taunting 
manner with her face quite close to mine: 
"well?" 
"well, miss?" i answered, almost falling over her and checking 
myself. 
she stood looking at me, and, of course, i stood looking at her. 
"am i pretty?" 
"yes; i think you are very pretty." 
"am i insulting?" 
"not so much so as you were last time," said i. 
"not so much so?" 
"no." 
she fired when she asked the last question, and she slapped my face 
with such force as she had, when i answered it. 
"now?" said she. "you little coarse monster, what do you think of 
me now?" 
"i shall not tell you." 
"because you are going to tell, up-stairs. is that it?" 
"no," said i, "that's not it." 
"why don't you cry again, you little wretch?" 
"because i'll never cry for you again," said i. which was, i 
suppose, as false a declaration as ever was made; for i was 
inwardly crying for her then, and i know what i know of the pain 
she cost me afterwards. 
we went on our way up-stairs after this episode; and, as we were 
going up, we met a gentleman groping his way down. 
"whom have we here?" asked the gentleman, stopping and looking at 
me. 
"a boy," said estella. 
he was a burly man of an exceedingly dark complexion, with an 
exceedingly large head and a corresponding large hand. he took my 
chin in his large hand and turned up my face to have a look at me 
by the light of the candle. he was prematurely bald on the top of 
his head, and had bushy black eyebrows that wouldn't lie down but 
stood up bristling. his eyes were set very deep in his head, and 
were disagreeably sharp and suspicious. he had a large watchchain, 
and strong black dots where his beard and whiskers would have been 
if he had let them. he was nothing to me, and i could have had no 
foresight then, that he ever would be anything to me, but it 
happened that i had this opportunity of observing him well. 
"boy of the neighbourhood? hey?" said he. 
"yes, sir," said i. 
"how do you come here?" 
"miss havisham sent for me, sir," i explained. 
"well! behave yourself. i have a pretty large experience of boys, 
and you're a bad set of fellows. now mind!" said he, biting the 
side of his great forefinger as he frowned at me, "you behave 
yourself!" 
with those words, he released me - which i was glad of, for his 
hand smelt of scented soap - and went his way down-stairs. i 
wondered whether he could be a doctor; but no, i thought; he 
couldn't be a doctor, or he would have a quieter and more 
persuasive manner. there was not much time to consider the subject, 
for we were soon in miss havisham's room, where she and everything 
else were just as i had left them. estella left me standing near 
the door, and i stood there until miss havisham cast her eyes upon 
me from the dressing-table. 
"so!" she said, without being startled or surprised; "the days have 
worn away, have they?" 
"yes, ma'am. to-day is-" 
"there, there, there!" with the impatient movement of her fingers. 
"i don't want to know. are you ready to play?" 
i was obliged to answer in some confusion, "i don't think i am, 
ma'am." 
"not at cards again?" she demanded, with a searching look. 
"yes, ma'am; i could do that, if i was wanted." 
"since this house strikes you old and grave, boy," said miss 
havisham, impatiently, "and you are unwilling to play, are you 
willing to work?" 
i could answer this inquiry with a better heart than i had been 
able to find for the other question, and i said i was quite 
willing. 
"then go into that opposite room," said she, pointing at the door 
behind me with her withered hand, "and wait there till i come." 
i crossed the staircase landing, and entered the room she 
indicated. from that room, too, the daylight was completely 
excluded, and it had an airless smell that was oppressive. a fire 
had been lately kindled in the damp old-fashioned grate, and it was 
more disposed to go out than to burn up, and the reluctant smoke 
which hung in the room seemed colder than the clearer air - like 
our own marsh mist. certain wintry branches of candles on the high 
chimneypiece faintly lighted the chamber: or, it would be more 
expressive to say, faintly troubled its darkness. it was spacious, 
and i dare say had once been handsome, but every discernible thing 
in it was covered with dust and mould, and dropping to pieces. the 
most prominent object was a long table with a tablecloth spread on 
it, as if a feast had been in preparation when the house and the 
clocks all stopped together. an epergne or centrepiece of some kind 
was in the middle of this cloth; it was so heavily overhung with 
cobwebs that its form was quite undistinguishable; and, as i looked 
along the yellow expanse out of which i remember its seeming to 
grow, like a black fungus, i saw speckled-legged spiders with 
blotchy bodies running home to it, and running out from it, as if 
some circumstances of the greatest public importance had just 
transpired in the spider community. 
i heard the mice too, rattling behind the panels, as if the same 
occurrence were important to their interests. but, the blackbeetles 
took no notice of the agitation, and groped about the hearth in a 
ponderous elderly way, as if they were short-sighted and hard of 
hearing, and not on terms with one another. 
these crawling things had fascinated my attention and i was 
watching them from a distance, when miss havisham laid a hand upon 
my shoulder. in her other hand she had a crutch-headed stick on 
which she leaned, and she looked like the witch of the place. 
"this," said she, pointing to the long table with her stick, "is 
where i will be laid when i am dead. they shall come and look at me 
here." 
with some vague misgiving that she might get upon the table then 
and there and die at once, the complete realization of the ghastly 
waxwork at the fair, i shrank under her touch. 
"what do you think that is?" she asked me, again pointing with her 
stick; "that, where those cobwebs are?" 
"i can't guess what it is, ma'am." 
"it's a great cake. a bride-cake. mine!" 
she looked all round the room in a glaring manner, and then said, 
leaning on me while her hand twitched my shoulder, "come, come, 
come! walk me, walk me!" 
i made out from this, that the work i had to do, was to walk miss 
havisham round and round the room. accordingly, i started at once, 
and she leaned upon my shoulder, and we went away at a pace that 
might have been an imitation (founded on my first impulse under 
that roof) of mr. pumblechook's chaise-cart. 
she was not physically strong, and after a little time said, 
"slower!" still, we went at an impatient fitful speed, and as we 
went, she twitched the hand upon my shoulder, and worked her mouth, 
and led me to believe that we were going fast because her thoughts 
went fast. after a while she said, "call estella!" so i went out on 
the landing and roared that name as i had done on the previous 
occasion. when her light appeared, i returned to miss havisham, and 
we started away again round and round the room. 
if only estella had come to be a spectator of our proceedings, i 
should have felt sufficiently discontented; but, as she brought 
with her the three ladies and the gentleman whom i had seen below, 
i didn't know what to do. in my politeness, i would have stopped; 
but, miss havisham twitched my shoulder, and we posted on - with a 
shame-faced consciousness on my part that they would think it was 
all my doing. 
"dear miss havisham," said miss sarah pocket. "how well you look!" 
"i do not," returned miss havisham. "i am yellow skin and bone." 
camilla brightened when miss pocket met with this rebuff; and she 
murmured, as she plaintively contemplated miss havisham, "poor dear 
soul! certainly not to be expected to look well, poor thing. the 
idea!" 
"and how are you?" said miss havisham to camilla. as we were close 
to camilla then, i would have stopped as a matter of course, only 
miss havisham wouldn't stop. we swept on, and i felt that i was 
highly obnoxious to camilla. 
"thank you, miss havisham," she returned, "i am as well as can be 
expected." 
"why, what's the matter with you?" asked miss havisham, with 
exceeding sharpness. 
"nothing worth mentioning," replied camilla. "i don't wish to make 
a display of my feelings, but i have habitually thought of you more 
in the night than i am quite equal to." 
"then don't think of me," retorted miss havisham. 
"very easily said!" remarked camilla, amiably repressing a sob, 
while a hitch came into her upper lip, and her tears overflowed. 
"raymond is a witness what ginger and sal volatile i am obliged to 
take in the night. raymond is a witness what nervous jerkings i 
have in my legs. chokings and nervous jerkings, however, are 
nothing new to me when i think with anxiety of those i love. if i 
could be less affectionate and sensitive, i should have a better 
digestion and an iron set of nerves. i am sure i wish it could be 
so. but as to not thinking of you in the night - the idea!" here, a 
burst of tears. 
the raymond referred to, i understood to be the gentleman present, 
and him i understood to be mr. camilla. he came to the rescue at 
this point, and said in a consolatory and complimentary voice, 
"camilla, my dear, it is well known that your family feelings are 
gradually undermining you to the extent of making one of your legs 
shorter than the other." 
"i am not aware," observed the grave lady whose voice i had heard 
but once, "that to think of any person is to make a great claim 
upon that person, my dear." 
miss sarah pocket, whom i now saw to be a little dry brown 
corrugated old woman, with a small face that might have been made 
of walnut shells, and a large mouth like a cat's without the 
whiskers, supported this position by saying, "no, indeed, my dear. 
hem!" 
"thinking is easy enough," said the grave lady. 
"what is easier, you know?" assented miss sarah pocket. 
"oh, yes, yes!" cried camilla, whose fermenting feelings appeared 
to rise from her legs to her bosom. "it's all very true! it's a 
weakness to be so affectionate, but i can't help it. no doubt my 
health would be much better if it was otherwise, still i wouldn't 
change my disposition if i could. it's the cause of much suffering, 
but it's a consolation to know i posses it, when i wake up in the 
night." here another burst of feeling. 
miss havisham and i had never stopped all this time, but kept going 
round and round the room: now, brushing against the skirts of the 
visitors: now, giving them the whole length of the dismal chamber. 
"there's matthew!" said camilla. "never mixing with any natural 
ties, never coming here to see how miss havisham is! i have taken 
to the sofa with my staylace cut, and have lain there hours, 
insensible, with my head over the side, and my hair all down, and 
my feet i don't know where-" 
("much higher than your head, my love," said mr. camilla.) 
"i have gone off into that state, hours and hours, on account of 
matthew's strange and inexplicable conduct, and nobody has thanked 
me." 
"really i must say i should think not!" interposed the grave lady. 
"you see, my dear," added miss sarah pocket (a blandly vicious 
personage), "the question to put to yourself is, who did you expect 
to thank you, my love?" 
"without expecting any thanks, or anything of the sort," resumed 
camilla, "i have remained in that state, hours and hours, and 
raymond is a witness of the extent to which i have choked, and what 
the total inefficacy of ginger has been, and i have been heard at 
the pianoforte-tuner's across the street, where the poor mistaken 
children have even supposed it to be pigeons cooing at a 
distance-and now to be told-." here camilla put her hand to her 
throat, and began to be quite chemical as to the formation of new 
combinations there. 
when this same matthew was mentioned, miss havisham stopped me and 
herself, and stood looking at the speaker. this change had a great 
influence in bringing camilla's chemistry to a sudden end. 
"matthew will come and see me at last," said miss havisham, 
sternly, "when i am laid on that table. that will be his place - 
there," striking the table with her stick, "at my head! and yours 
will be there! and your husband's there! and sarah pocket's there! 
and georgiana's there! now you all know where to take your stations 
when you come to feast upon me. and now go!" 
at the mention of each name, she had struck the table with her 
stick in a new place. she now said, "walk me, walk me!" and we went 
on again. 
"i suppose there's nothing to be done," exclaimed camilla, "but 
comply and depart. it's something to have seen the object of one's 
love and duty, for even so short a time. i shall think of it with a 
melancholy satisfaction when i wake up in the night. i wish matthew 
could have that comfort, but he sets it at defiance. i am 
determined not to make a display of my feelings, but it's very hard 
to be told one wants to feast on one's relations - as if one was a 
giant - and to be told to go. the bare idea!" 
mr. camilla interposing, as mrs. camilla laid her hand upon her 
heaving bosom, that lady assumed an unnatural fortitude of manner 
which i supposed to be expressive of an intention to drop and choke 
when out of view, and kissing her hand to miss havisham, was 
escorted forth. sarah pocket and georgiana contended who should 
remain last; but, sarah was too knowing to be outdone, and ambled 
round georgiana with that artful slipperiness, that the latter was 
obliged to take precedence. sarah pocket then made her separate 
effect of departing with "bless you, miss havisham dear!" and with 
a smile of forgiving pity on her walnut-shell countenance for the 
weaknesses of the rest. 
while estella was away lighting them down, miss havisham still 
walked with her hand on my shoulder, but more and more slowly. at 
last she stopped before the fire, and said, after muttering and 
looking at it some seconds: 
"this is my birthday, pip." 
i was going to wish her many happy returns, when she lifted her 
stick. 
"i don't suffer it to be spoken of. i don't suffer those who were 
here just now, or any one, to speak of it. they come here on the 
day, but they dare not refer to it." 
of course i made no further effort to refer to it. 
"on this day of the year, long before you were born, this heap of 
decay," stabbing with her crutched stick at the pile of cobwebs on 
the table but not touching it, "was brought here. it and i have 
worn away together. the mice have gnawed at it, and sharper teeth 
than teeth of mice have gnawed at me." 
she held the head of her stick against her heart as she stood 
looking at the table; she in her once white dress, all yellow and 
withered; the once white cloth all yellow and withered; everything 
around, in a state to crumble under a touch. 
"when the ruin is complete," said she, with a ghastly look, "and 
when they lay me dead, in my bride's dress on the bride's table - 
which shall be done, and which will be the finished curse upon him 
so much the better if it is done on this day!" 
she stood looking at the table as if she stood looking at her own 
figure lying there. i remained quiet. estella returned, and she too 
remained quiet. it seemed to me that we continued thus for a long 
time. in the heavy air of the room, and the heavy darkness that 
brooded in its remoter corners, i even had an alarming fancy that 
estella and i might presently begin to decay. 
at length, not coming out of her distraught state by degrees, but 
in an instant, miss havisham said, "let me see you two play cards; 
why have you not begun?" with that, we returned to her room, and 
sat down as before; i was beggared, as before; and again, as 
before, miss havisham watched us all the time, directed my 
attention to estella's beauty, and made me notice it the more by 
trying her jewels on estella's breast and hair. 
estella, for her part, likewise treated me as before; except that 
she did not condescend to speak. when we had played some halfdozen 
games, a day was appointed for my return, and i was taken down into 
the yard to be fed in the former dog-like manner. there, too, i was 
again left to wander about as i liked. 
it is not much to the purpose whether a gate in that garden wall 
which i had scrambled up to peep over on the last occasion was, on 
that last occasion, open or shut. enough that i saw no gate then, 
and that i saw one now. as it stood open, and as i knew that 
estella had let the visitors out - for, she had returned with the 
keys in her hand - i strolled into the garden and strolled all over 
it. it was quite a wilderness, and there were old melon-frames and 
cucumber-frames in it, which seemed in their decline to have 
produced a spontaneous growth of weak attempts at pieces of old 
hats and boots, with now and then a weedy offshoot into the 
likeness of a battered saucepan. 
when i had exhausted the garden, and a greenhouse with nothing in 
it but a fallen-down grape-vine and some bottles, i found myself in 
the dismal corner upon which i had looked out of the window. never 
questioning for a moment that the house was now empty, i looked in 
at another window, and found myself, to my great surprise, 
exchanging a broad stare with a pale young gentleman with red 
eyelids and light hair. 
this pale young gentleman quickly disappeared, and re-appeared 
beside me. he had been at his books when i had found myself staring 
at him, and i now saw that he was inky. 
"halloa!" said he, "young fellow!" 
halloa being a general observation which i had usually observed to 
be best answered by itself, i said, "halloa!" politely omitting 
young fellow. 
"who let you in?" said he. 
"miss estella." 
"who gave you leave to prowl about?" 
"miss estella." 
"come and fight," said the pale young gentleman. 
what could i do but follow him? i have often asked myself the 
question since: but, what else could i do? his manner was so final 
and i was so astonished, that i followed where he led, as if i had 
been under a spell. 
"stop a minute, though," he said, wheeling round before we had gone 
many paces. "i ought to give you a reason for fighting, too. there 
it is!" in a most irritating manner he instantly slapped his hands 
against one another, daintily flung one of his legs up behind him, 
pulled my hair, slapped his hands again, dipped his head, and 
butted it into my stomach. 
the bull-like proceeding last mentioned, besides that it was 
unquestionably to be regarded in the light of a liberty, was 
particularly disagreeable just after bread and meat. i therefore 
hit out at him and was going to hit out again, when he said, 
"aha! would you?" and began dancing backwards and forwards in a 
manner quite unparalleled within my limited experience. 
"laws of the game!" said he. here, he skipped from his left leg on 
to his right. "regular rules!" here, he skipped from his right leg 
on to his left. "come to the ground, and go through the 
preliminaries!" here, he dodged backwards and forwards, and did all 
sorts of things while i looked helplessly at him. 
i was secretly afraid of him when i saw him so dexterous; but, i 
felt morally and physically convinced that his light head of hair 
could have had no business in the pit of my stomach, and that i had 
a right to consider it irrelevant when so obtruded on my attention. 
therefore, i followed him without a word, to a retired nook of the 
garden, formed by the junction of two walls and screened by some 
rubbish. on his asking me if i was satisfied with the ground, and 
on my replying yes, he begged my leave to absent himself for a 
moment, and quickly returned with a bottle of water and a sponge 
dipped in vinegar. "available for both," he said, placing these 
against the wall. and then fell to pulling off, not only his jacket 
and waistcoat, but his shirt too, in a manner at once 
light-hearted, businesslike, and bloodthirsty. 
although he did not look very healthy - having pimples on his face, 
and a breaking out at his mouth - these dreadful preparations quite 
appalled me. i judged him to be about my own age, but he was much 
taller, and he had a way of spinning himself about that was full of 
appearance. for the rest, he was a young gentleman in a grey suit 
(when not denuded for battle), with his elbows, knees, wrists, and 
heels, considerably in advance of the rest of him as to 
development. 
my heart failed me when i saw him squaring at me with every 
demonstration of mechanical nicety, and eyeing my anatomy as if he 
were minutely choosing his bone. i never have been so surprised in 
my life, as i was when i let out the first blow, and saw him lying 
on his back, looking up at me with a bloody nose and his face 
exceedingly fore-shortened. 
but, he was on his feet directly, and after sponging himself with a 
great show of dexterity began squaring again. the second greatest 
surprise i have ever had in my life was seeing him on his back 
again, looking up at me out of a black eye. 
his spirit inspired me with great respect. he seemed to have no 
strength, and he never once hit me hard, and he was always knocked 
down; but, he would be up again in a moment, sponging himself or 
drinking out of the water-bottle, with the greatest satisfaction in 
seconding himself according to form, and then came at me with an 
air and a show that made me believe he really was going to do for 
me at last. he got heavily bruised, for i am sorry to record that 
the more i hit him, the harder i hit him; but, he came up again and 
again and again, until at last he got a bad fall with the back of 
his head against the wall. even after that crisis in our affairs, 
he got up and turned round and round confusedly a few times, not 
knowing where i was; but finally went on his knees to his sponge 
and threw it up: at the same time panting out, "that means you have 
won." 
he seemed so brave and innocent, that although i had not proposed 
the contest i felt but a gloomy satisfaction in my victory. indeed, 
i go so far as to hope that i regarded myself while dressing, as a 
species of savage young wolf, or other wild beast. however, i got 
dressed, darkly wiping my sanguinary face at intervals, and i said, 
"can i help you?" and he said "no thankee," and i said "good 
afternoon," and he said "same to you." 
when i got into the court-yard, i found estella waiting with the 
keys. but, she neither asked me where i had been, nor why i had 
kept her waiting; and there was a bright flush upon her face, as 
though something had happened to delight her. instead of going 
straight to the gate, too, she stepped back into the passage, and 
beckoned me. 
"come here! you may kiss me, if you like." 
i kissed her cheek as she turned it to me. i think i would have 
gone through a great deal to kiss her cheek. but, i felt that the 
kiss was given to the coarse common boy as a piece of money might 
have been, and that it was worth nothing. 
what with the birthday visitors, and what with the cards, and what 
with the fight, my stay had lasted so long, that when i neared home 
the light on the spit of sand off the point on the marshes was 
gleaming against a black night-sky, and joe's furnace was flinging 
a path of fire across the road. 
chapter 12 
my mind grew very uneasy on the subject of the pale young 
gentleman. the more i thought of the fight, and recalled the pale 
young gentleman on his back in various stages of puffy and 
incrimsoned countenance, the more certain it appeared that 
something would be done to me. i felt that the pale young 
gentleman's blood was on my head, and that the law would avenge it. 
without having any definite idea of the penalties i had incurred, 
it was clear to me that village boys could not go stalking about 
the country, ravaging the houses of gentlefolks and pitching into 
the studious youth of england, without laying themselves open to 
severe punishment. for some days, i even kept close at home, and 
looked out at the kitchen door with the greatest caution and 
trepidation before going on an errand, lest the officers of the 
county jail should pounce upon me. the pale young gentleman's nose 
had stained my trousers, and i tried to wash out that evidence of 
my guilt in the dead of night. i had cut my knuckles against the 
pale young gentleman's teeth, and i twisted my imagination into a 
thousand tangles, as i devised incredible ways of accounting for 
that damnatory circumstance when i should be haled before the 
judges. 
when the day came round for my return to the scene of the deed of 
violence, my terrors reached their height. whether myrmidons of 
justice, specially sent down from london, would be lying in ambush 
behind the gate? whether miss havisham, preferring to take personal 
vengeance for an outrage done to her house, might rise in those 
grave-clothes of hers, draw a pistol, and shoot me dead? whether 
suborned boys - a numerous band of mercenaries - might be engaged 
to fall upon me in the brewery, and cuff me until i was no more? it 
was high testimony to my confidence in the spirit of the pale young 
gentleman, that i never imagined him accessory to these 
retaliations; they always came into my mind as the acts of 
injudicious relatives of his, goaded on by the state of his visage 
and an indignant sympathy with the family features. 
however, go to miss havisham's i must, and go i did. and behold! 
nothing came of the late struggle. it was not alluded to in any 
way, and no pale young gentleman was to be discovered on the 
premises. i found the same gate open, and i explored the garden, 
and even looked in at the windows of the detached house; but, my 
view was suddenly stopped by the closed shutters within, and all 
was lifeless. only in the corner where the combat had taken place, 
could i detect any evidence of the young gentleman's existence. 
there were traces of his gore in that spot, and i covered them with 
garden-mould from the eye of man. 
on the broad landing between miss havisham's own room and that 
other room in which the long table was laid out, i saw a 
garden-chair - a light chair on wheels, that you pushed from 
behind. it had been placed there since my last visit, and i 
entered, that same day, on a regular occupation of pushing miss 
havisham in this chair (when she was tired of walking with her hand 
upon my shoulder) round her own room, and across the landing, and 
round the other room. over and over and over again, we would make 
these journeys, and sometimes they would last as long as three 
hours at a stretch. i insensibly fall into a general mention of 
these journeys as numerous, because it was at once settled that i 
should return every alternate day at noon for these purposes, and 
because i am now going to sum up a period of at least eight or ten 
months. 
as we began to be more used to one another, miss havisham talked 
more to me, and asked me such questions as what had i learnt and 
what was i going to be? i told her i was going to be apprenticed to 
joe, i believed; and i enlarged upon my knowing nothing and wanting 
to know everything, in the hope that she might offer some help 
towards that desirable end. but, she did not; on the contrary, she 
seemed to prefer my being ignorant. neither did she ever give me 
any money - or anything but my daily dinner - nor ever stipulate 
that i should be paid for my services. 
estella was always about, and always let me in and out, but never 
told me i might kiss her again. sometimes, she would coldly 
tolerate me; sometimes, she would condescend to me; sometimes, she 
would be quite familiar with me; sometimes, she would tell me 
energetically that she hated me. miss havisham would often ask me 
in a whisper, or when we were alone, "does she grow prettier and 
prettier, pip?" and when i said yes (for indeed she did), would 
seem to enjoy it greedily. also, when we played at cards miss 
havisham would look on, with a miserly relish of estella's moods, 
whatever they were. and sometimes, when her moods were so many and 
so contradictory of one another that i was puzzled what to say or 
do, miss havisham would embrace her with lavish fondness, murmuring 
something in her ear that sounded like "break their hearts my pride 
and hope, break their hearts and have no mercy!" 
there was a song joe used to hum fragments of at the forge, of 
which the burden was old clem. this was not a very ceremonious way 
of rendering homage to a patron saint; but, i believe old clem 
stood in that relation towards smiths. it was a song that imitated 
the measure of beating upon iron, and was a mere lyrical excuse for 
the introduction of old clem's respected name. thus, you were to 
hammer boys round - old clem! with a thump and a sound - old clem! 
beat it out, beat it out - old clem! with a clink for the stout - 
old clem! blow the fire, blow the fire - old clem! roaring dryer, 
soaring higher - old clem! one day soon after the appearance of the 
chair, miss havisham suddenly saying to me, with the impatient 
movement of her fingers, "there, there, there! sing!" i was 
surprised into crooning this ditty as i pushed her over the floor. 
it happened so to catch her fancy, that she took it up in a low 
brooding voice as if she were singing in her sleep. after that, it 
became customary with us to have it as we moved about, and estella 
would often join in; though the whole strain was so subdued, even 
when there were three of us, that it made less noise in the grim 
old house than the lightest breath of wind. 
what could i become with these surroundings? how could my character 
fail to be influenced by them? is it to be wondered at if my 
thoughts were dazed, as my eyes were, when i came out into the 
natural light from the misty yellow rooms? 
perhaps, i might have told joe about the pale young gentleman, if i 
had not previously been betrayed into those enormous inventions to 
which i had confessed. under the circumstances, i felt that joe 
could hardly fail to discern in the pale young gentleman, an 
appropriate passenger to be put into the black velvet coach; 
therefore, i said nothing of him. besides: that shrinking from 
having miss havisham and estella discussed, which had come upon me 
in the beginning, grew much more potent as time went on. i reposed 
complete confidence in no one but biddy; but, i told poor biddy 
everything. why it came natural to me to do so, and why biddy had a 
deep concern in everything i told her, i did not know then, though 
i think i know now. 
meanwhile, councils went on in the kitchen at home, fraught with 
almost insupportable aggravation to my exasperated spirit. that 
ass, pumblechook, used often to come over of a night for the purpose 
of discussing my prospects with my sister; and i really do believe 
(to this hour with less penitence than i ought to feel), that if 
these hands could have taken a linchpin out of his chaise-cart, 
they would have done it. the miserable man was a man of that 
confined stolidity of mind, that he could not discuss my prospects 
without having me before him - as it were, to operate upon - and he 
would drag me up from my stool (usually by the collar) where i was 
quiet in a corner, and, putting me before the fire as if i were 
going to be cooked, would begin by saying, "now, mum, here is this 
boy! here is this boy which you brought up by hand. hold up your 
head, boy, and be for ever grateful unto them which so did do. now, 
mum, with respections to this boy!" and then he would rumple my 
hair the wrong way - which from my earliest remembrance, as already 
hinted, i have in my soul denied the right of any fellow-creature 
to do - and would hold me before him by the sleeve: a spectacle of 
imbecility only to be equalled by himself. 
then, he and my sister would pair off in such nonsensical 
speculations about miss havisham, and about what she would do with 
me and for me, that i used to want - quite painfully - to burst 
into spiteful tears, fly at pumblechook, and pummel him all over. 
in these dialogues, my sister spoke to me as if she were morally 
wrenching one of my teeth out at every reference; while pumblechook 
himself, self-constituted my patron, would sit supervising me with 
a depreciatory eye, like the architect of my fortunes who thought 
himself engaged on a very unremunerative job. 
in these discussions, joe bore no part. but he was often talked at, 
while they were in progress, by reason of mrs. joe's perceiving that 
he was not favourable to my being taken from the forge. i was fully 
old enough now, to be apprenticed to joe; and when joe sat with the 
poker on his knees thoughtfully raking out the ashes between the 
lower bars, my sister would so distinctly construe that innocent 
action into opposition on his part, that she would dive at him, 
take the poker out of his hands, shake him, and put it away. there 
was a most irritating end to every one of these debates. all in a 
moment, with nothing to lead up to it, my sister would stop herself 
in a yawn, and catching sight of me as it were incidentally, would 
swoop upon me with, "come! there's enough of you! you get along to 
bed; you've given trouble enough for one night, i hope!" as if i 
had besought them as a favour to bother my life out. 
we went on in this way for a long time, and it seemed likely that 
we should continue to go on in this way for a long time, when, one 
day, miss havisham stopped short as she and i were walking, she 
leaning on my shoulder; and said with some displeasure: 
"you are growing tall, pip!" 
i thought it best to hint, through the medium of a meditative look, 
that this might be occasioned by circumstances over which i had no 
control. 
she said no more at the time; but, she presently stopped and looked 
at me again; and presently again; and after that, looked frowning 
and moody. on the next day of my attendance when our usual exercise 
was over, and i had landed her at her dressingtable, she stayed me 
with a movement of her impatient fingers: 
"tell me the name again of that blacksmith of yours." 
"joe gargery, ma'am." 
"meaning the master you were to be apprenticed to?" 
"yes, miss havisham." 
"you had better be apprenticed at once. would gargery come here 
with you, and bring your indentures, do you think?" 
i signified that i had no doubt he would take it as an honour to be 
asked. 
"then let him come." 
"at any particular time, miss havisham?" 
"there, there! i know nothing about times. let him come soon, and 
come along with you." 
when i got home at night, and delivered this message for joe, my 
sister "went on the rampage," in a more alarming degree than at any 
previous period. she asked me and joe whether we supposed she was 
door-mats under our feet, and how we dared to use her so, and what 
company we graciously thought she was fit for? when she had 
exhausted a torrent of such inquiries, she threw a candlestick at 
joe, burst into a loud sobbing, got out the dustpan - which was 
always a very bad sign - put on her coarse apron, and began 
cleaning up to a terrible extent. not satisfied with a dry 
cleaning, she took to a pail and scrubbing-brush, and cleaned us 
out of house and home, so that we stood shivering in the back-yard. 
it was ten o'clock at night before we ventured to creep in again, 
and then she asked joe why he hadn't married a negress slave at 
once? joe offered no answer, poor fellow, but stood feeling his 
whisker and looking dejectedly at me, as if he thought it really 
might have been a better speculation. 
chapter 13 
it was a trial to my feelings, on the next day but one, to see joe 
arraying himself in his sunday clothes to accompany me to miss 
havisham's. however, as he thought his court-suit necessary to the 
occasion, it was not for me tell him that he looked far better in 
his working dress; the rather, because i knew he made himself so 
dreadfully uncomfortable, entirely on my account, and that it was 
for me he pulled up his shirt-collar so very high behind, that it 
made the hair on the crown of his head stand up like a tuft of 
feathers. 
at breakfast time my sister declared her intention of going to town 
with us, and being left at uncle pumblechook's and called for "when 
we had done with our fine ladies" - a way of putting the case, from 
which joe appeared inclined to augur the worst. the forge was shut 
up for the day, and joe inscribed in chalk upon the door (as it was 
his custom to do on the very rare occasions when he was not at 
work) the monosyllable hout, accompanied by a sketch of an arrow 
supposed to be flying in the direction he had taken. 
we walked to town, my sister leading the way in a very large beaver 
bonnet, and carrying a basket like the great seal of england in 
plaited straw, a pair of pattens, a spare shawl, and an umbrella, 
though it was a fine bright day. i am not quite clear whether these 
articles were carried penitentially or ostentatiously; but, i 
rather think they were displayed as articles of property - much as 
cleopatra or any other sovereign lady on the rampage might exhibit 
her wealth in a pageant or procession. 
when we came to pumblechook's, my sister bounced in and left us. as 
it was almost noon, joe and i held straight on to miss havisham's 
house. estella opened the gate as usual, and, the moment she 
appeared, joe took his hat off and stood weighing it by the brim in 
both his hands: as if he had some urgent reason in his mind for 
being particular to half a quarter of an ounce. 
estella took no notice of either of us, but led us the way that i 
knew so well. i followed next to her, and joe came last. when i 
looked back at joe in the long passage, he was still weighing his 
hat with the greatest care, and was coming after us in long strides 
on the tips of his toes. 
estella told me we were both to go in, so i took joe by the 
coat-cuff and conducted him into miss havisham's presence. she was 
seated at her dressing-table, and looked round at us immediately. 
"oh!" said she to joe. "you are the husband of the sister of this 
boy?" 
i could hardly have imagined dear old joe looking so unlike himself 
or so like some extraordinary bird; standing, as he did, 
speechless, with his tuft of feathers ruffled, and his mouth open, 
as if he wanted a worm. 
"you are the husband," repeated miss havisham, "of the sister of 
this boy?" 
it was very aggravating; but, throughout the interview joe 
persisted in addressing me instead of miss havisham. 
"which i meantersay, pip," joe now observed in a manner that was at 
once expressive of forcible argumentation, strict confidence, and 
great politeness, "as i hup and married your sister, and i were at 
the time what you might call (if you was anyways inclined) a single 
man." 
"well!" said miss havisham. "and you have reared the boy, with the 
intention of taking him for your apprentice; is that so, mr. 
gargery?" 
"you know, pip," replied joe, "as you and me were ever friends, and 
it were looked for'ard to betwixt us, as being calc'lated to lead 
to larks. not but what, pip, if you had ever made objections to the 
business - such as its being open to black and sut, or such-like - 
not but what they would have been attended to, don't you see?" 
"has the boy," said miss havisham, "ever made any objection? does 
he like the trade?" 
"which it is well beknown to yourself, pip," returned joe, 
strengthening his former mixture of argumentation, confidence, and 
politeness, "that it were the wish of your own hart." (i saw the 
idea suddenly break upon him that he would adapt his epitaph to the 
occasion, before he went on to say) "and there weren't no objection 
on your part, and pip it were the great wish of your heart!" 
it was quite in vain for me to endeavour to make him sensible that 
he ought to speak to miss havisham. the more i made faces and 
gestures to him to do it, the more confidential, argumentative, and 
polite, he persisted in being to me. 
"have you brought his indentures with you?" asked miss havisham. 
"well, pip, you know," replied joe, as if that were a little 
unreasonable, "you yourself see me put 'em in my 'at, and therefore 
you know as they are here." with which he took them out, and gave 
them, not to miss havisham, but to me. i am afraid i was ashamed of 
the dear good fellow - i know i was ashamed of him - when i saw 
that estella stood at the back of miss havisham's chair, and that 
her eyes laughed mischievously. i took the indentures out of his 
hand and gave them to miss havisham. 
"you expected," said miss havisham, as she looked them over, "no 
premium with the boy?" 
"joe!" i remonstrated; for he made no reply at all. "why don't you 
answer-" 
"pip," returned joe, cutting me short as if he were hurt, "which i 
meantersay that were not a question requiring a answer betwixt 
yourself and me, and which you know the answer to be full well no. 
you know it to be no, pip, and wherefore should i say it?" 
miss havisham glanced at him as if she understood what he really 
was, better than i had thought possible, seeing what he was there; 
and took up a little bag from the table beside her. 
"pip has earned a premium here," she said, "and here it is. there 
are five-and-twenty guineas in this bag. give it to your master, 
pip." 
as if he were absolutely out of his mind with the wonder awakened 
in him by her strange figure and the strange room, joe, even at 
this pass, persisted in addressing me. 
"this is wery liberal on your part, pip," said joe, "and it is as 
such received and grateful welcome, though never looked for, far 
nor near nor nowheres. and now, old chap," said joe, conveying to 
me a sensation, first of burning and then of freezing, for i felt 
as if that familiar expression were applied to miss havisham; "and 
now, old chap, may we do our duty! may you and me do our duty, both 
on us by one and another, and by them which your liberal present - 
have - conweyed - to be - for the satisfaction of mind - of - them 
as never-" here joe showed that he felt he had fallen into 
frightful difficulties, until he triumphantly rescued himself with 
the words, "and from myself far be it!" these words had such a 
round and convincing sound for him that he said them twice. 
"good-bye, pip!" said miss havisham. "let them out, estella." 
"am i to come again, miss havisham?" i asked. 
"no. gargery is your master now. gargery! one word!" 
thus calling him back as i went out of the door, i heard her say to 
joe, in a distinct emphatic voice, "the boy has been a good boy 
here, and that is his reward. of course, as an honest man, you will 
expect no other and no more." 
how joe got out of the room, i have never been able to determine; 
but, i know that when he did get out he was steadily proceeding 
up-stairs instead of coming down, and was deaf to all remonstrances 
until i went after him and laid hold of him. in another minute we 
were outside the gate, and it was locked, and estella was gone. 
when we stood in the daylight alone again, joe backed up against a 
wall, and said to me, "astonishing!" and there he remained so long, 
saying "astonishing" at intervals, so often, that i began to think 
his senses were never coming back. at length he prolonged his 
remark into "pip, i do assure you this is as-tonishing!" and so, by 
degrees, became conversational and able to walk away. 
i have reason to think that joe's intellects were brightened by the 
encounter they had passed through, and that on our way to 
pumblechook's he invented a subtle and deep design. my reason is to 
be found in what took place in mr. pumblechook's parlour: where, on 
our presenting ourselves, my sister sat in conference with that 
detested seedsman. 
"well?" cried my sister, addressing us both at once. "and what's 
happened to you? i wonder you condescend to come back to such poor 
society as this, i am sure i do!" 
"miss havisham," said joe, with a fixed look at me, like an effort 
of remembrance, "made it wery partick'ler that we should give her - 
were it compliments or respects, pip?" 
"compliments," i said. 
"which that were my own belief," answered joe - "her compliments to 
mrs. j. gargery-" 
"much good they'll do me!" observed my sister; but rather gratified 
too. 
"and wishing," pursued joe, with another fixed look at me, like 
another effort of remembrance, "that the state of miss havisham's 
elth were sitch as would have - allowed, were it, pip?" 
"of her having the pleasure," i added. 
"of ladies' company," said joe. and drew a long breath. 
"well!" cried my sister, with a mollified glance at mr. pumblechook. 
"she might have had the politeness to send that message at first, 
but it's better late than never. and what did she give young 
rantipole here?" 
"she giv' him," said joe, "nothing." 
mrs. joe was going to break out, but joe went on. 
"what she giv'," said joe, "she giv' to his friends. 'and by his 
friends,' were her explanation, 'i mean into the hands of his 
sister mrs. j. gargery.' them were her words; 'mrs. j. gargery.' she 
mayn't have know'd," added joe, with an appearance of reflection, 
"whether it were joe, or jorge." 
my sister looked at pumblechook: who smoothed the elbows of his 
wooden armchair, and nodded at her and at the fire, as if he had 
known all about it beforehand. 
"and how much have you got?" asked my sister, laughing. positively, 
laughing! 
"what would present company say to ten pound?" demanded joe. 
"they'd say," returned my sister, curtly, "pretty well. not too 
much, but pretty well." 
"it's more than that, then," said joe. 
that fearful impostor, pumblechook, immediately nodded, and said, 
as he rubbed the arms of his chair: "it's more than that, mum." 
"why, you don't mean to say-" began my sister. 
"yes i do, mum," said pumblechook; "but wait a bit. go on, joseph. 
good in you! go on!" 
"what would present company say," proceeded joe, "to twenty pound?" 
"handsome would be the word," returned my sister. 
"well, then," said joe, "it's more than twenty pound." 
that abject hypocrite, pumblechook, nodded again, and said, with a 
patronizing laugh, "it's more than that, mum. good again! follow her 
up, joseph!" 
"then to make an end of it," said joe, delightedly handing the bag 
to my sister; "it's five-and-twenty pound." 
"it's five-and-twenty pound, mum," echoed that basest of swindlers, 
pumblechook, rising to shake hands with her; "and it's no more than 
your merits (as i said when my opinion was asked), and i wish you 
joy of the money!" 
if the villain had stopped here, his case would have been 
sufficiently awful, but he blackened his guilt by proceeding to 
take me into custody, with a right of patronage that left all his 
former criminality far behind. 
"now you see, joseph and wife," said pumblechook, as he took me by 
the arm above the elbow, "i am one of them that always go right 
through with what they've begun. this boy must be bound, out of 
hand. that's my way. bound out of hand." 
"goodness knows, uncle pumblechook," said my sister (grasping the 
money), "we're deeply beholden to you." 
"never mind me, mum," returned that diabolical corn-chandler. "a 
pleasure's a pleasure, all the world over. but this boy, you know; 
we must have him bound. i said i'd see to it - to tell you the 
truth." 
the justices were sitting in the town hall near at hand, and we at 
once went over to have me bound apprentice to joe in the 
magisterial presence. i say, we went over, but i was pushed over by 
pumblechook, exactly as if i had that moment picked a pocket or 
fired a rick; indeed, it was the general impression in court that i 
had been taken red-handed, for, as pumblechook shoved me before him 
through the crowd, i heard some people say, "what's he done?" and 
others, "he's a young 'un, too, but looks bad, don't he?" one person 
of mild and benevolent aspect even gave me a tract ornamented with 
a woodcut of a malevolent young man fitted up with a perfect 
sausage-shop of fetters, and entitled, to be read in my cell. 
the hall was a queer place, i thought, with higher pews in it than 
a church - and with people hanging over the pews looking on - and 
with mighty justices (one with a powdered head) leaning back in 
chairs, with folded arms, or taking snuff, or going to sleep, or 
writing, or reading the newspapers - and with some shining black 
portraits on the walls, which my unartistic eye regarded as a 
composition of hardbake and sticking-plaister. here, in a corner, 
my indentures were duly signed and attested, and i was "bound;" mr. 
pumblechook holding me all the while as if we had looked in on our 
way to the scaffold, to have those little preliminaries disposed 
of. 
when we had come out again, and had got rid of the boys who had 
been put into great spirits by the expectation of seeing me 
publicly tortured, and who were much disappointed to find that my 
friends were merely rallying round me, we went back to 
pumblechook's. and there my sister became so excited by the 
twenty-five guineas, that nothing would serve her but we must have 
a dinner out of that windfall, at the blue boar, and that 
pumblechook must go over in his chaise-cart, and bring the hubbles 
and mr. wopsle. 
it was agreed to be done; and a most melancholy day i passed. for, 
it inscrutably appeared to stand to reason, in the minds of the 
whole company, that i was an excrescence on the entertainment. and 
to make it worse, they all asked me from time to time - in short, 
whenever they had nothing else to do - why i didn't enjoy myself. 
and what could i possibly do then, but say i was enjoying myself - 
when i wasn't? 
however, they were grown up and had their own way, and they made 
the most of it. that swindling pumblechook, exalted into the 
beneficent contriver of the whole occasion, actually took the top 
of the table; and, when he addressed them on the subject of my 
being bound, and had fiendishly congratulated them on my being 
liable to imprisonment if i played at cards, drank strong liquors, 
kept late hours or bad company, or indulged in other vagaries which 
the form of my indentures appeared to contemplate as next to 
inevitable, he placed me standing on a chair beside him, to 
illustrate his remarks. 
my only other remembrances of the great festival are, that they 
wouldn't let me go to sleep, but whenever they saw me dropping off, 
woke me up and told me to enjoy myself. that, rather late in the 
evening mr. wopsle gave us collins's ode, and threw his bloodstain'd 
sword in thunder down, with such effect, that a waiter came in and 
said, "the commercials underneath sent up their compliments, and it 
wasn't the tumblers' arms." that, they were all in excellent 
spirits on the road home, and sang o lady fair! mr. wopsle taking 
the bass, and asserting with a tremendously strong voice (in reply 
to the inquisitive bore who leads that piece of music in a most 
impertinent manner, by wanting to know all about everybody's 
private affairs) that he was the man with his white locks flowing, 
and that he was upon the whole the weakest pilgrim going. 
finally, i remember that when i got into my little bedroom i was 
truly wretched, and had a strong conviction on me that i should 
never like joe's trade. i had liked it once, but once was not now. 
chapter 14 
it is a most miserable thing to feel ashamed of home. there may be 
black ingratitude in the thing, and the punishment may be 
retributive and well deserved; but, that it is a miserable thing, i 
can testify. 
home had never been a very pleasant place to me, because of my 
sister's temper. but, joe had sanctified it, and i had believed in 
it. i had believed in the best parlour as a most elegant saloon; i 
had believed in the front door, as a mysterious portal of the 
temple of state whose solemn opening was attended with a sacrifice 
of roast fowls; i had believed in the kitchen as a chaste though 
not magnificent apartment; i had believed in the forge as the 
glowing road to manhood and independence. within a single year, all 
this was changed. now, it was all coarse and common, and i would 
not have had miss havisham and estella see it on any account. 
how much of my ungracious condition of mind may have been my own 
fault, how much miss havisham's, how much my sister's, is now of no 
moment to me or to any one. the change was made in me; the thing 
was done. well or ill done, excusably or inexcusably, it was done. 
once, it had seemed to me that when i should at last roll up my 
shirt-sleeves and go into the forge, joe's 'prentice, i should be 
distinguished and happy. now the reality was in my hold, i only 
felt that i was dusty with the dust of small coal, and that i had a 
weight upon my daily remembrance to which the anvil was a feather. 
there have been occasions in my later life (i suppose as in most 
lives) when i have felt for a time as if a thick curtain had fallen 
on all its interest and romance, to shut me out from anything save 
dull endurance any more. never has that curtain dropped so heavy 
and blank, as when my way in life lay stretched out straight before 
me through the newly-entered road of apprenticeship to joe. 
i remember that at a later period of my "time," i used to stand 
about the churchyard on sunday evenings when night was falling, 
comparing my own perspective with the windy marsh view, and making 
out some likeness between them by thinking how flat and low both 
were, and how on both there came an unknown way and a dark mist and 
then the sea. i was quite as dejected on the first working-day of 
my apprenticeship as in that after-time; but i am glad to know that 
i never breathed a murmur to joe while my indentures lasted. it is 
about the only thing i am glad to know of myself in that 
connection. 
for, though it includes what i proceed to add, all the merit of 
what i proceed to add was joe's. it was not because i was faithful, 
but because joe was faithful, that i never ran away and went for a 
soldier or a sailor. it was not because i had a strong sense of the 
virtue of industry, but because joe had a strong sense of the 
virtue of industry, that i worked with tolerable zeal against the 
grain. it is not possible to know how far the influence of any 
amiable honest-hearted duty-doing man flies out into the world; but 
it is very possible to know how it has touched one's self in going 
by, and i know right well, that any good that intermixed itself 
with my apprenticeship came of plain contented joe, and not of 
restlessly aspiring discontented me. 
what i wanted, who can say? how can i say, when i never knew? what 
i dreaded was, that in some unlucky hour i, being at my grimiest 
and commonest, should lift up my eyes and see estella looking in at 
one of the wooden windows of the forge. i was haunted by the fear 
that she would, sooner or later, find me out, with a black face and 
hands, doing the coarsest part of my work, and would exult over me 
and despise me. often after dark, when i was pulling the bellows 
for joe, and we were singing old clem, and when the thought how we 
used to sing it at miss havisham's would seem to show me estella's 
face in the fire, with her pretty hair fluttering in the wind and 
her eyes scorning me, - often at such a time i would look towards 
those panels of black night in the wall which the wooden windows 
then were, and would fancy that i saw her just drawing her face 
away, and would believe that she had come at last. 
after that, when we went in to supper, the place and the meal would 
have a more homely look than ever, and i would feel more ashamed of 
home than ever, in my own ungracious breast. 
chapter 15 
as i was getting too big for mr. wopsle's great-aunt's room, my 
education under that preposterous female terminated. not, however, 
until biddy had imparted to me everything she knew, from the little 
catalogue of prices, to a comic song she had once bought for a 
halfpenny. although the only coherent part of the latter piece of 
literature were the opening lines, 
when i went to lunnon town sirs, too rul loo rul too rul loo rul 
wasn't i done very brown sirs? too rul loo rul too rul loo rul 
still, in my desire to be wiser, i got this composition by heart 
with the utmost gravity; nor do i recollect that i questioned its 
merit, except that i thought (as i still do) the amount of too rul 
somewhat in excess of the poetry. in my hunger for information, i 
made proposals to mr. wopsle to bestow some intellectual crumbs upon 
me; with which he kindly complied. as it turned out, however, that 
he only wanted me for a dramatic lay-figure, to be contradicted and 
embraced and wept over and bullied and clutched and stabbed and 
knocked about in a variety of ways, i soon declined that course of 
instruction; though not until mr. wopsle in his poetic fury had 
severely mauled me. 
whatever i acquired, i tried to impart to joe. this statement 
sounds so well, that i cannot in my conscience let it pass 
unexplained. i wanted to make joe less ignorant and common, that he 
might be worthier of my society and less open to estella's 
reproach. 
the old battery out on the marshes was our place of study, and a 
broken slate and a short piece of slate pencil were our educational 
implements: to which joe always added a pipe of tobacco. i never 
knew joe to remember anything from one sunday to another, or to 
acquire, under my tuition, any piece of information whatever. yet 
he would smoke his pipe at the battery with a far more sagacious 
air than anywhere else - even with a learned air - as if he 
considered himself to be advancing immensely. dear fellow, i hope 
he did. 
it was pleasant and quiet, out there with the sails on the river 
passing beyond the earthwork, and sometimes, when the tide was low, 
looking as if they belonged to sunken ships that were still sailing 
on at the bottom of the water. whenever i watched the vessels 
standing out to sea with their white sails spread, i somehow 
thought of miss havisham and estella; and whenever the light struck 
aslant, afar off, upon a cloud or sail or green hill-side or 
water-line, it was just the same. - miss havisham and estella and 
the strange house and the strange life appeared to have something 
to do with everything that was picturesque. 
one sunday when joe, greatly enjoying his pipe, had so plumed 
himself on being "most awful dull," that i had given him up for the 
day, i lay on the earthwork for some time with my chin on my hand, 
descrying traces of miss havisham and estella all over the 
prospect, in the sky and in the water, until at last i resolved to 
mention a thought concerning them that had been much in my head. 
"joe," said i; "don't you think i ought to make miss havisham a 
visit?" 
"well, pip," returned joe, slowly considering. "what for?" 
"what for, joe? what is any visit made for?" 
"there is some wisits, p'r'aps," said joe, "as for ever remains 
open to the question, pip. but in regard to wisiting miss havisham. 
she might think you wanted something - expected something of her." 
"don't you think i might say that i did not, joe?" 
"you might, old chap," said joe. "and she might credit it. 
similarly she mightn't." 
joe felt, as i did, that he had made a point there, and he pulled 
hard at his pipe to keep himself from weakening it by repetition. 
"you see, pip," joe pursued, as soon as he was past that danger, 
"miss havisham done the handsome thing by you. when miss havisham 
done the handsome thing by you, she called me back to say to me as 
that were all." 
"yes, joe. i heard her." 
"all," joe repeated, very emphatically. 
"yes, joe. i tell you, i heard her." 
"which i meantersay, pip, it might be that her meaning were - make 
a end on it! - as you was! - me to the north, and you to the south! 
keep in sunders!" 
i had thought of that too, and it was very far from comforting to 
me to find that he had thought of it; for it seemed to render it 
more probable. 
"but, joe." 
"yes, old chap." 
"here am i, getting on in the first year of my time, and, since the 
day of my being bound, i have never thanked miss havisham, or asked 
after her, or shown that i remember her." 
"that's true, pip; and unless you was to turn her out a set of 
shoes all four round - and which i meantersay as even a set of 
shoes all four round might not be acceptable as a present, in a 
total wacancy of hoofs-" 
"i don't mean that sort of remembrance, joe; i don't mean a 
present." 
but joe had got the idea of a present in his head and must harp 
upon it. "or even," said he, "if you was helped to knocking her up 
a new chain for the front door - or say a gross or two of 
shark-headed screws for general use - or some light fancy article, 
such as a toasting-fork when she took her muffins - or a gridiron 
when she took a sprat or such like-" 
"i don't mean any present at all, joe," i interposed. 
"well," said joe, still harping on it as though i had particularly 
pressed it, "if i was yourself, pip, i wouldn't. no, i would not. 
for what's a door-chain when she's got one always up? and 
shark-headers is open to misrepresentations. and if it was a 
toasting-fork, you'd go into brass and do yourself no credit. and 
the oncommonest workman can't show himself oncommon in a gridiron - 
for a gridiron is a gridiron," said joe, steadfastly impressing it 
upon me, as if he were endeavouring to rouse me from a fixed 
delusion, "and you may haim at what you like, but a gridiron it 
will come out, either by your leave or again your leave, and you 
can't help yourself-" 
"my dear joe," i cried, in desperation, taking hold of his coat, 
"don't go on in that way. i never thought of making miss havisham 
any present." 
"no, pip," joe assented, as if he had been contending for that, all 
along; "and what i say to you is, you are right, pip." 
"yes, joe; but what i wanted to say, was, that as we are rather 
slack just now, if you would give me a half-holiday to-morrow, i 
think i would go up-town and make a call on miss est - havisham." 
"which her name," said joe, gravely, "ain't estavisham, pip, unless 
she have been rechris'ened." 
"i know, joe, i know. it was a slip of mine. what do you think of 
it, joe?" 
in brief, joe thought that if i thought well of it, he thought well 
of it. but, he was particular in stipulating that if i were not 
received with cordiality, or if i were not encouraged to repeat my 
visit as a visit which had no ulterior object but was simply one of 
gratitude for a favour received, then this experimental trip should 
have no successor. by these conditions i promised to abide. 
now, joe kept a journeyman at weekly wages whose name was orlick. 
he pretended that his christian name was dolge - a clear 
impossibility - but he was a fellow of that obstinate disposition 
that i believe him to have been the prey of no delusion in this 
particular, but wilfully to have imposed that name upon the village 
as an affront to its understanding. he was a broadshouldered 
loose-limbed swarthy fellow of great strength, never in a hurry, 
and always slouching. he never even seemed to come to his work on 
purpose, but would slouch in as if by mere accident; and when he 
went to the jolly bargemen to eat his dinner, or went away at 
night, he would slouch out, like cain or the wandering jew, as if 
he had no idea where he was going and no intention of ever coming 
back. he lodged at a sluice-keeper's out on the marshes, and on 
working days would come slouching from his hermitage, with his 
hands in his pockets and his dinner loosely tied in a bundle round 
his neck and dangling on his back. on sundays he mostly lay all day 
on the sluice-gates, or stood against ricks and barns. he always 
slouched, locomotively, with his eyes on the ground; and, when 
accosted or otherwise required to raise them, he looked up in a 
half resentful, half puzzled way, as though the only thought he 
ever had, was, that it was rather an odd and injurious fact that he 
should never be thinking. 
this morose journeyman had no liking for me. when i was very small 
and timid, he gave me to understand that the devil lived in a black 
corner of the forge, and that he knew the fiend very well: also 
that it was necessary to make up the fire, once in seven years, 
with a live boy, and that i might consider myself fuel. when i 
became joe's 'prentice, orlick was perhaps confirmed in some 
suspicion that i should displace him; howbeit, he liked me still 
less. not that he ever said anything, or did anything, openly 
importing hostility; i only noticed that he always beat his sparks 
in my direction, and that whenever i sang old clem, he came in out 
of time. 
dolge orlick was at work and present, next day, when i reminded joe 
of my half-holiday. he said nothing at the moment, for he and joe 
had just got a piece of hot iron between them, and i was at the 
bellows; but by-and-by he said, leaning on his hammer: 
"now, master! sure you're not a-going to favour only one of us. if 
young pip has a half-holiday, do as much for old orlick." i suppose 
he was about five-and-twenty, but he usually spoke of himself as an 
ancient person. 
"why, what'll you do with a half-holiday, if you get it?" said joe. 
"what'll i do with it! what'll he do with it? i'll do as much with 
it as him," said orlick. 
"as to pip, he's going up-town," said joe. 
"well then, as to old orlick, he's a-going up-town," retorted that 
worthy. "two can go up-town. tan't only one wot can go up-town. 
"don't lose your temper," said joe. 
"shall if i like," growled orlick. "some and their up-towning! now, 
master! come. no favouring in this shop. be a man!" 
the master refusing to entertain the subject until the journeyman 
was in a better temper, orlick plunged at the furnace, drew out a 
red-hot bar, made at me with it as if he were going to run it 
through my body, whisked it round my head, laid it on the anvil, 
hammered it out - as if it were i, i thought, and the sparks were 
my spirting blood - and finally said, when he had hammered himself 
hot and the iron cold, and he again leaned on his hammer: 
"now, master!" 
"are you all right now?" demanded joe. 
"ah! i am all right," said gruff old orlick. 
"then, as in general you stick to your work as well as most men," 
said joe, "let it be a half-holiday for all." 
my sister had been standing silent in the yard, within hearing - 
she was a most unscrupulous spy and listener - and she instantly 
looked in at one of the windows. 
"like you, you fool!" said she to joe, "giving holidays to great 
idle hulkers like that. you are a rich man, upon my life, to waste 
wages in that way. i wish i was his master!" 
"you'd be everybody's master, if you durst," retorted orlick, with 
an ill-favoured grin. 
("let her alone," said joe.) 
"i'd be a match for all noodles and all rogues," returned my 
sister, beginning to work herself into a mighty rage. "and i 
couldn't be a match for the noodles, without being a match for your 
master, who's the dunder-headed king of the noodles. and i couldn't 
be a match for the rogues, without being a match for you, who are 
the blackest-looking and the worst rogue between this and france. 
now!" 
"you're a foul shrew, mother gargery," growled the journeyman. 
"if that makes a judge of rogues, you ought to be a good'un." 
("let her alone, will you?" said joe.) 
"what did you say?" cried my sister, beginning to scream. "what did 
you say? what did that fellow orlick say to me, pip? what did he 
call me, with my husband standing by? o! o! o!" each of these 
exclamations was a shriek; and i must remark of my sister, what is 
equally true of all the violent women i have ever seen, that 
passion was no excuse for her, because it is undeniable that 
instead of lapsing into passion, she consciously and deliberately 
took extraordinary pains to force herself into it, and became 
blindly furious by regular stages; "what was the name he gave me 
before the base man who swore to defend me? o! hold me! o!" 
"ah-h-h!" growled the journeyman, between his teeth, "i'd hold you, 
if you was my wife. i'd hold you under the pump, and choke it out 
of you." 
("i tell you, let her alone," said joe.) 
"oh! to hear him!" cried my sister, with a clap of her hands and a 
scream together - which was her next stage. "to hear the names he's 
giving me! that orlick! in my own house! me, a married woman! with 
my husband standing by! o! o!" here my sister, after a fit of 
clappings and screamings, beat her hands upon her bosom and upon 
her knees, and threw her cap off, and pulled her hair down - which 
were the last stages on her road to frenzy. being by this time a 
perfect fury and a complete success, she made a dash at the door, 
which i had fortunately locked. 
what could the wretched joe do now, after his disregarded 
parenthetical interruptions, but stand up to his journeyman, and 
ask him what he meant by interfering betwixt himself and mrs. joe; 
and further whether he was man enough to come on? old orlick felt 
that the situation admitted of nothing less than coming on, and was 
on his defence straightway; so, without so much as pulling off 
their singed and burnt aprons, they went at one another, like two 
giants. but, if any man in that neighbourhood could stand up long 
against joe, i never saw the man. orlick, as if he had been of no 
more account than the pale young gentleman, was very soon among the 
coal-dust, and in no hurry to come out of it. then, joe unlocked 
the door and picked up my sister, who had dropped insensible at the 
window (but who had seen the fight first, i think), and who was 
carried into the house and laid down, and who was recommended to 
revive, and would do nothing but struggle and clench her hands in 
joe's hair. then, came that singular calm and silence which succeed 
all uproars; and then, with the vague sensation which i have always 
connected with such a lull - namely, that it was sunday, and 
somebody was dead - i went up-stairs to dress myself. 
when i came down again, i found joe and orlick sweeping up, without 
any other traces of discomposure than a slit in one of orlick's 
nostrils, which was neither expressive nor ornamental. a pot of 
beer had appeared from the jolly bargemen, and they were sharing it 
by turns in a peaceable manner. the lull had a sedative and 
philosophical influence on joe, who followed me out into the road 
to say, as a parting observation that might do me good, "on the 
rampage, pip, and off the rampage, pip - such is life!" 
with what absurd emotions (for, we think the feelings that are very 
serious in a man quite comical in a boy) i found myself again going 
to miss havisham's, matters little here. nor, how i passed and 
repassed the gate many times before i could make up my mind to 
ring. nor, how i debated whether i should go away without ringing; 
nor, how i should undoubtedly have gone, if my time had been my 
own, to come back. 
miss sarah pocket came to the gate. no estella. 
"how, then? you here again?" said miss pocket. "what do you want?" 
when i said that i only came to see how miss havisham was, sarah 
evidently deliberated whether or no she should send me about my 
business. but, unwilling to hazard the responsibility, she let me 
in, and presently brought the sharp message that i was to "come 
up." 
everything was unchanged, and miss havisham was alone. 
"well?" said she, fixing her eyes upon me. "i hope you want 
nothing? you'll get nothing." 
"no, indeed, miss havisham. i only wanted you to know that i am 
doing very well in my apprenticeship, and am always much obliged to 
you." 
"there, there!" with the old restless fingers. "come now and then; 
come on your birthday. - ay!" she cried suddenly, turning herself 
and her chair towards me, "you are looking round for estella? hey?" 
i had been looking round - in fact, for estella - and i stammered 
that i hoped she was well. 
"abroad," said miss havisham; "educating for a lady; far out of 
reach; prettier than ever; admired by all who see her. do you feel 
that you have lost her?" 
there was such a malignant enjoyment in her utterance of the last 
words, and she broke into such a disagreeable laugh, that i was at 
a loss what to say. she spared me the trouble of considering, by 
dismissing me. when the gate was closed upon me by sarah of the 
walnut-shell countenance, i felt more than ever dissatisfied with 
my home and with my trade and with everything; and that was all i 
took by that motion. 
as i was loitering along the high-street, looking in disconsolately 
at the shop windows, and thinking what i would buy if i were a 
gentleman, who should come out of the bookshop but mr. wopsle. mr 
wopsle had in his hand the affecting tragedy of george barnwell, in 
which he had that moment invested sixpence, with the view of 
heaping every word of it on the head of pumblechook, with whom he 
was going to drink tea. no sooner did he see me, than he appeared 
to consider that a special providence had put a 'prentice in his 
way to be read at; and he laid hold of me, and insisted on my 
accompanying him to the pumblechookian parlour. as i knew it would 
be miserable at home, and as the nights were dark and the way was 
dreary, and almost any companionship on the road was better than 
none, i made no great resistance; consequently, we turned into 
pumblechook's just as the street and the shops were lighting up. 
as i never assisted at any other representation of george barnwell, 
i don't know how long it may usually take; but i know very well 
that it took until half-past nine o' clock that night, and that 
when mr. wopsle got into newgate, i thought he never would go to the 
scaffold, he became so much slower than at any former period of his 
disgraceful career. i thought it a little too much that he should 
complain of being cut short in his flower after all, as if he had 
not been running to seed, leaf after leaf, ever since his course 
began. this, however, was a mere question of length and 
wearisomeness. what stung me, was the identification of the whole 
affair with my unoffending self. when barnwell began to go wrong, i 
declare that i felt positively apologetic, pumblechook's indignant 
stare so taxed me with it. wopsle, too, took pains to present me in 
the worst light. at once ferocious and maudlin, i was made to 
murder my uncle with no extenuating circumstances whatever; 
millwood put me down in argument, on every occasion; it became 
sheer monomania in my master's daughter to care a button for me; 
and all i can say for my gasping and procrastinating conduct on the 
fatal morning, is, that it was worthy of the general feebleness of 
my character. even after i was happily hanged and wopsle had closed 
the book, pumblechook sat staring at me, and shaking his head, and 
saying, "take warning, boy, take warning!" as if it were a 
well-known fact that i contemplated murdering a near relation, 
provided i could only induce one to have the weakness to become my 
benefactor. 
it was a very dark night when it was all over, and when i set out 
with mr. wopsle on the walk home. beyond town, we found a heavy 
mist out, and it fell wet and thick. the turnpike lamp was a blur, 
quite out of the lamp's usual place apparently, and its rays looked 
solid substance on the fog. we were noticing this, and saying how 
that the mist rose with a change of wind from a certain quarter of 
our marshes, when we came upon a man, slouching under the lee of 
the turnpike house. 
"halloa!" we said, stopping. "orlick, there?" 
"ah!" he answered, slouching out. "i was standing by, a minute, on 
the chance of company." 
"you are late," i remarked. 
orlick not unnaturally answered, "well? and you're late." 
"we have been," said mr. wopsle, exalted with his late performance, 
"we have been indulging, mr. orlick, in an intellectual evening." 
old orlick growled, as if he had nothing to say about that, and we 
all went on together. i asked him presently whether he had been 
spending his half-holiday up and down town? 
"yes," said he, "all of it. i come in behind yourself. i didn't see 
you, but i must have been pretty close behind you. by-the-bye, the 
guns is going again." 
"at the hulks?" said i. 
"ay! there's some of the birds flown from the cages. the guns have 
been going since dark, about. you'll hear one presently." 
in effect, we had not walked many yards further, when the 
wellremembered boom came towards us, deadened by the mist, and 
heavily rolled away along the low grounds by the river, as if it 
were pursuing and threatening the fugitives. 
"a good night for cutting off in," said orlick. "we'd be puzzled 
how to bring down a jail-bird on the wing, to-night." 
the subject was a suggestive one to me, and i thought about it in 
silence. mr. wopsle, as the ill-requited uncle of the evening's 
tragedy, fell to meditating aloud in his garden at camberwell. 
orlick, with his hands in his pockets, slouched heavily at my side. 
it was very dark, very wet, very muddy, and so we splashed along. 
now and then, the sound of the signal cannon broke upon us again, 
and again rolled sulkily along the course of the river. i kept 
myself to myself and my thoughts. mr. wopsle died amiably at 
camberwell, and exceedingly game on bosworth field, and in the 
greatest agonies at glastonbury. orlick sometimes growled, "beat it 
out, beat it out - old clem! with a clink for the stout - old 
clem!" i thought he had been drinking, but he was not drunk. 
thus, we came to the village. the way by which we approached it, 
took us past the three jolly bargemen, which we were surprised to 
find - it being eleven o'clock - in a state of commotion, with the 
door wide open, and unwonted lights that had been hastily caught up 
and put down, scattered about. mr. wopsle dropped in to ask what was 
the matter (surmising that a convict had been taken), but came 
running out in a great hurry. 
"there's something wrong," said he, without stopping, "up at your 
place, pip. run all!" 
"what is it?" i asked, keeping up with him. so did orlick, at my 
side. 
"i can't quite understand. the house seems to have been violently 
entered when joe gargery was out. supposed by convicts. somebody 
has been attacked and hurt." 
we were running too fast to admit of more being said, and we made 
no stop until we got into our kitchen. it was full of people; the 
whole village was there, or in the yard; and there was a surgeon, 
and there was joe, and there was a group of women, all on the floor 
in the midst of the kitchen. the unemployed bystanders drew back 
when they saw me, and so i became aware of my sister - lying 
without sense or movement on the bare boards where she had been 
knocked down by a tremendous blow on the back of the head, dealt by 
some unknown hand when her face was turned towards the fire - 
destined never to be on the rampage again, while she was the wife 
of joe. 
chapter 16 
with my head full of george barnwell, i was at first disposed to 
believe that i must have had some hand in the attack upon my 
sister, or at all events that as her near relation, popularly known 
to be under obligations to her, i was a more legitimate object of 
suspicion than any one else. but when, in the clearer light of next 
morning, i began to reconsider the matter and to hear it discussed 
around me on all sides, i took another view of the case, which was 
more reasonable. 
joe had been at the three jolly bargemen, smoking his pipe, from a 
quarter after eight o'clock to a quarter before ten. while he was 
there, my sister had been seen standing at the kitchen door, and 
had exchanged good night with a farm-labourer going home. the man 
could not be more particular as to the time at which he saw her (he 
got into dense confusion when he tried to be), than that it must 
have been before nine. when joe went home at five minutes before 
ten, he found her struck down on the floor, and promptly called in 
assistance. the fire had not then burnt unusually low, nor was the 
snuff of the candle very long; the candle, however, had been blown 
out. 
nothing had been taken away from any part of the house. neither, 
beyond the blowing out of the candle - which stood on a table 
between the door and my sister, and was behind her when she stood 
facing the fire and was struck - was there any disarrangement of 
the kitchen, excepting such as she herself had made, in falling and 
bleeding. but, there was one remarkable piece of evidence on the 
spot. she had been struck with something blunt and heavy, on the 
head and spine; after the blows were dealt, something heavy had 
been thrown down at her with considerable violence, as she lay on 
her face. and on the ground beside her, when joe picked her up, was 
a convict's leg-iron which had been filed asunder. 
now, joe, examining this iron with a smith's eye, declared it to 
have been filed asunder some time ago. the hue and cry going off to 
the hulks, and people coming thence to examine the iron, joe's 
opinion was corroborated. they did not undertake to say when it had 
left the prison-ships to which it undoubtedly had once belonged; 
but they claimed to know for certain that that particular manacle 
had not been worn by either of the two convicts who had escaped last 
night. further, one of those two was already re-taken, and had not 
freed himself of his iron. 
knowing what i knew, i set up an inference of my own here. i 
believed the iron to be my convict's iron - the iron i had seen and 
heard him filing at, on the marshes - but my mind did not accuse 
him of having put it to its latest use. for, i believed one of two 
other persons to have become possessed of it, and to have turned it 
to this cruel account. either orlick, or the strange man who had 
shown me the file. 
now, as to orlick; he had gone to town exactly as he told us when 
we picked him up at the turnpike, he had been seen about town all 
the evening, he had been in divers companies in several 
public-houses, and he had come back with myself and mr. wopsle. 
there was nothing against him, save the quarrel; and my sister had 
quarrelled with him, and with everybody else about her, ten 
thousand times. as to the strange man; if he had come back for his 
two bank-notes there could have been no dispute about them, because 
my sister was fully prepared to restore them. besides, there had 
been no altercation; the assailant had come in so silently and 
suddenly, that she had been felled before she could look round. 
it was horrible to think that i had provided the weapon, however 
undesignedly, but i could hardly think otherwise. i suffered 
unspeakable trouble while i considered and reconsidered whether i 
should at last dissolve that spell of my childhood, and tell joe 
all the story. for months afterwards, i every day settled the 
question finally in the negative, and reopened and reargued it next 
morning. the contention came, after all, to this; - the secret was 
such an old one now, had so grown into me and become a part of 
myself, that i could not tear it away. in addition to the dread 
that, having led up to so much mischief, it would be now more 
likely than ever to alienate joe from me if he believed it, i had a 
further restraining dread that he would not believe it, but would 
assort it with the fabulous dogs and veal-cutlets as a monstrous 
invention. however, i temporized with myself, of course - for, was 
i not wavering between right and wrong, when the thing is always 
done? - and resolved to make a full disclosure if i should see any 
such new occasion as a new chance of helping in the discovery of 
the assailant. 
the constables, and the bow street men from london - for, this 
happened in the days of the extinct red-waistcoated police - were 
about the house for a week or two, and did pretty much what i have 
heard and read of like authorities doing in other such cases. they 
took up several obviously wrong people, and they ran their heads 
very hard against wrong ideas, and persisted in trying to fit the 
circumstances to the ideas, instead of trying to extract ideas from 
the circumstances. also, they stood about the door of the jolly 
bargemen, with knowing and reserved looks that filled the whole 
neighbourhood with admiration; and they had a mysterious manner of 
taking their drink, that was almost as good as taking the culprit. 
but not quite, for they never did it. 
long after these constitutional powers had dispersed, my sister lay 
very ill in bed. her sight was disturbed, so that she saw objects 
multiplied, and grasped at visionary teacups and wine-glasses 
instead of the realities; her hearing was greatly impaired; her 
memory also; and her speech was unintelligible. when, at last, she 
came round so far as to be helped down-stairs, it was still 
necessary to keep my slate always by her, that she might indicate 
in writing what she could not indicate in speech. as she was (very 
bad handwriting apart) a more than indifferent speller, and as joe 
was a more than indifferent reader, extraordinary complications 
arose between them, which i was always called in to solve. the 
administration of mutton instead of medicine, the substitution of 
tea for joe, and the baker for bacon, were among the mildest of my 
own mistakes. 
however, her temper was greatly improved, and she was patient. a 
tremulous uncertainty of the action of all her limbs soon became a 
part of her regular state, and afterwards, at intervals of two or 
three months, she would often put her hands to her head, and would 
then remain for about a week at a time in some gloomy aberration of 
mind. we were at a loss to find a suitable attendant for her, until 
a circumstance happened conveniently to relieve us. mr. wopsle's 
great-aunt conquered a confirmed habit of living into which she had 
fallen, and biddy became a part of our establishment. 
it may have been about a month after my sister's reappearance in 
the kitchen, when biddy came to us with a small speckled box 
containing the whole of her worldly effects, and became a blessing 
to the household. above all, she was a blessing to joe, for the 
dear old fellow was sadly cut up by the constant contemplation of 
the wreck of his wife, and had been accustomed, while attending on 
her of an evening, to turn to me every now and then and say, with 
his blue eyes moistened, "such a fine figure of a woman as she once 
were, pip!" biddy instantly taking the cleverest charge of her as 
though she had studied her from infancy, joe became able in some 
sort to appreciate the greater quiet of his life, and to get down 
to the jolly bargemen now and then for a change that did him good. 
it was characteristic of the police people that they had all more 
or less suspected poor joe (though he never knew it), and that they 
had to a man concurred in regarding him as one of the deepest 
spirits they had ever encountered. 
biddy's first triumph in her new office, was to solve a difficulty 
that had completely vanquished me. i had tried hard at it, but had 
made nothing of it. thus it was: 
again and again and again, my sister had traced upon the slate, a 
character that looked like a curious t, and then with the utmost 
eagerness had called our attention to it as something she 
particularly wanted. i had in vain tried everything producible that 
began with a t, from tar to toast and tub. at length it had come 
into my head that the sign looked like a hammer, and on my lustily 
calling that word in my sister's ear, she had begun to hammer on 
the table and had expressed a qualified assent. thereupon, i had 
brought in all our hammers, one after another, but without avail. 
then i bethought me of a crutch, the shape being much the same, and 
i borrowed one in the village, and displayed it to my sister with 
considerable confidence. but she shook her head to that extent when 
she was shown it, that we were terrified lest in her weak and 
shattered state she should dislocate her neck. 
when my sister found that biddy was very quick to understand her, 
this mysterious sign reappeared on the slate. biddy looked 
thoughtfully at it, heard my explanation, looked thoughtfully at my 
sister, looked thoughtfully at joe (who was always represented on 
the slate by his initial letter), and ran into the forge, followed 
by joe and me. 
"why, of course!" cried biddy, with an exultant face. "don't you 
see? it's him!" 
orlick, without a doubt! she had lost his name, and could only 
signify him by his hammer. we told him why we wanted him to come 
into the kitchen, and he slowly laid down his hammer, wiped his 
brow with his arm, took another wipe at it with his apron, and came 
slouching out, with a curious loose vagabond bend in the knees that 
strongly distinguished him. 
i confess that i expected to see my sister denounce him, and that i 
was disappointed by the different result. she manifested the 
greatest anxiety to be on good terms with him, was evidently much 
pleased by his being at length produced, and motioned that she 
would have him given something to drink. she watched his 
countenance as if she were particularly wishful to be assured that 
he took kindly to his reception, she showed every possible desire 
to conciliate him, and there was an air of humble propitiation in 
all she did, such as i have seen pervade the bearing of a child 
towards a hard master. after that day, a day rarely passed without 
her drawing the hammer on her slate, and without orlick's slouching 
in and standing doggedly before her, as if he knew no more than i 
did what to make of it. 
chapter 17 
i now fell into a regular routine of apprenticeship life, which was 
varied, beyond the limits of the village and the marshes, by no 
more remarkable circumstance than the arrival of my birthday and my 
paying another visit to miss havisham. i found miss sarah pocket 
still on duty at the gate, i found miss havisham just as i had left 
her, and she spoke of estella in the very same way, if not in the 
very same words. the interview lasted but a few minutes, and she 
gave me a guinea when i was going, and told me to come again on my 
next birthday. i may mention at once that this became an annual 
custom. i tried to decline taking the guinea on the first occasion, 
but with no better effect than causing her to ask me very angrily, 
if i expected more? then, and after that, i took it. 
so unchanging was the dull old house, the yellow light in the 
darkened room, the faded spectre in the chair by the dressing-table 
glass, that i felt as if the stopping of the clocks had stopped 
time in that mysterious place, and, while i and everything else 
outside it grew older, it stood still. daylight never entered the 
house as to my thoughts and remembrances of it, any more than as to 
the actual fact. it bewildered me, and under its influence i 
continued at heart to hate my trade and to be ashamed of home. 
imperceptibly i became conscious of a change in biddy, however. her 
shoes came up at the heel, her hair grew bright and neat, her hands 
were always clean. she was not beautiful - she was common, and 
could not be like estella - but she was pleasant and wholesome and 
sweet-tempered. she had not been with us more than a year (i 
remember her being newly out of mourning at the time it struck me), 
when i observed to myself one evening that she had curiously 
thoughtful and attentive eyes; eyes that were very pretty and very 
good. 
it came of my lifting up my own eyes from a task i was poring at - 
writing some passages from a book, to improve myself in two ways at 
once by a sort of stratagem - and seeing biddy observant of what i 
was about. i laid down my pen, and biddy stopped in her needlework 
without laying it down. 
"biddy," said i, "how do you manage it? either i am very stupid, or 
you are very clever." 
"what is it that i manage? i don't know," returned biddy, smiling. 
she managed our whole domestic life, and wonderfully too; but i did 
not mean that, though that made what i did mean, more surprising. 
"how do you manage, biddy," said i, "to learn everything that i 
learn, and always to keep up with me?" i was beginning to be rather 
vain of my knowledge, for i spent my birthday guineas on it, and 
set aside the greater part of my pocket-money for similar 
investment; though i have no doubt, now, that the little i knew was 
extremely dear at the price. 
"i might as well ask you," said biddy, "how you manage?" 
"no; because when i come in from the forge of a night, any one can 
see me turning to at it. but you never turn to at it, biddy." 
"i suppose i must catch it - like a cough," said biddy, quietly; 
and went on with her sewing. 
pursuing my idea as i leaned back in my wooden chair and looked at 
biddy sewing away with her head on one side, i began to think her 
rather an extraordinary girl. for, i called to mind now, that she 
was equally accomplished in the terms of our trade, and the names 
of our different sorts of work, and our various tools. in short, 
whatever i knew, biddy knew. theoretically, she was already as good 
a blacksmith as i, or better. 
"you are one of those, biddy," said i, "who make the most of every 
chance. you never had a chance before you came here, and see how 
improved you are!" 
biddy looked at me for an instant, and went on with her sewing. "i 
was your first teacher though; wasn't i?" said she, as she sewed. 
"biddy!" i exclaimed, in amazement. "why, you are crying!" 
"no i am not," said biddy, looking up and laughing. "what put that 
in your head?" 
what could have put it in my head, but the glistening of a tear as 
it dropped on her work? i sat silent, recalling what a drudge she 
had been until mr. wopsle's great-aunt successfully overcame that 
bad habit of living, so highly desirable to be got rid of by some 
people. i recalled the hopeless circumstances by which she had been 
surrounded in the miserable little shop and the miserable little 
noisy evening school, with that miserable old bundle of 
incompetence always to be dragged and shouldered. i reflected that 
even in those untoward times there must have been latent in biddy 
what was now developing, for, in my first uneasiness and discontent 
i had turned to her for help, as a matter of course. biddy sat 
quietly sewing, shedding no more tears, and while i looked at her 
and thought about it all, it occurred to me that perhaps i had not 
been sufficiently grateful to biddy. i might have been too 
reserved, and should have patronized her more (though i did not use 
that precise word in my meditations), with my confidence. 
"yes, biddy," i observed, when i had done turning it over, "you 
were my first teacher, and that at a time when we little thought of 
ever being together like this, in this kitchen." 
"ah, poor thing!" replied biddy. it was like her 
self-forgetfulness, to transfer the remark to my sister, and to get 
up and be busy about her, making her more comfortable; "that's 
sadly true!" 
"well!" said i, "we must talk together a little more, as we used to 
do. and i must consult you a little more, as i used to do. let us 
have a quiet walk on the marshes next sunday, biddy, and a long 
chat." 
my sister was never left alone now; but joe more than readily 
undertook the care of her on that sunday afternoon, and biddy and i 
went out together. it was summer-time, and lovely weather. when we 
had passed the village and the church and the churchyard, and were 
out on the marshes and began to see the sails of the ships as they 
sailed on, i began to combine miss havisham and estella with the 
prospect, in my usual way. when we came to the river-side and sat 
down on the bank, with the water rippling at our feet, making it 
all more quiet than it would have been without that sound, i 
resolved that it was a good time and place for the admission of 
biddy into my inner confidence. 
"biddy," said i, after binding her to secrecy, "i want to be a 
gentleman." 
"oh, i wouldn't, if i was you!" she returned. "i don't think it 
would answer." 
"biddy," said i, with some severity, "i have particular reasons for 
wanting to be a gentleman." 
"you know best, pip; but don't you think you are happier as you 
are?" 
"biddy," i exclaimed, impatiently, "i am not at all happy as i am. 
i am disgusted with my calling and with my life. i have never taken 
to either, since i was bound. don't be absurd." 
"was i absurd?" said biddy, quietly raising her eyebrows; "i am 
sorry for that; i didn't mean to be. i only want you to do well, 
and to be comfortable." 
"well then, understand once for all that i never shall or can be 
comfortable - or anything but miserable - there, biddy! - unless i 
can lead a very different sort of life from the life i lead now." 
"that's a pity!" said biddy, shaking her head with a sorrowful air. 
now, i too had so often thought it a pity, that, in the singular 
kind of quarrel with myself which i was always carrying on, i was 
half inclined to shed tears of vexation and distress when biddy 
gave utterance to her sentiment and my own. i told her she was 
right, and i knew it was much to be regretted, but still it was not 
to be helped. 
"if i could have settled down," i said to biddy, plucking up the 
short grass within reach, much as i had once upon a time pulled my 
feelings out of my hair and kicked them into the brewery wall: "if 
i could have settled down and been but half as fond of the forge as 
i was when i was little, i know it would have been much better for 
me. you and i and joe would have wanted nothing then, and joe and i 
would perhaps have gone partners when i was out of my time, and i 
might even have grown up to keep company with you, and we might 
have sat on this very bank on a fine sunday, quite different 
people. i should have been good enough for you; shouldn't i, 
biddy?" 
biddy sighed as she looked at the ships sailing on, and returned 
for answer, "yes; i am not over-particular." it scarcely sounded 
flattering, but i knew she meant well. 
"instead of that," said i, plucking up more grass and chewing a 
blade or two, "see how i am going on. dissatisfied, and 
uncomfortable, and - what would it signify to me, being coarse and 
common, if nobody had told me so!" 
biddy turned her face suddenly towards mine, and looked far more 
attentively at me than she had looked at the sailing ships. 
"it was neither a very true nor a very polite thing to say," she 
remarked, directing her eyes to the ships again. "who said it?" 
i was disconcerted, for i had broken away without quite seeing 
where i was going to. it was not to be shuffled off now, however, 
and i answered, "the beautiful young lady at miss havisham's, and 
she's more beautiful than anybody ever was, and i admire her 
dreadfully, and i want to be a gentleman on her account." having 
made this lunatic confession, i began to throw my torn-up grass 
into the river, as if i had some thoughts of following it. 
"do you want to be a gentleman, to spite her or to gain her over?" 
biddy quietly asked me, after a pause. 
"i don't know," i moodily answered. 
"because, if it is to spite her," biddy pursued, "i should think - 
but you know best - that might be better and more independently 
done by caring nothing for her words. and if it is to gain her 
over, i should think - but you know best - she was not worth 
gaining over." 
exactly what i myself had thought, many times. exactly what was 
perfectly manifest to me at the moment. but how could i, a poor 
dazed village lad, avoid that wonderful inconsistency into which 
the best and wisest of men fall every day? 
"it may be all quite true," said i to biddy, "but i admire her 
dreadfully." 
in short, i turned over on my face when i came to that, and got a 
good grasp on the hair on each side of my head, and wrenched it 
well. all the while knowing the madness of my heart to be so very 
mad and misplaced, that i was quite conscious it would have served 
my face right, if i had lifted it up by my hair, and knocked it 
against the pebbles as a punishment for belonging to such an idiot. 
biddy was the wisest of girls, and she tried to reason no more with 
me. she put her hand, which was a comfortable hand though roughened 
by work, upon my hands, one after another, and gently took them out 
of my hair. then she softly patted my shoulder in a soothing way, 
while with my face upon my sleeve i cried a little - exactly as i 
had done in the brewery yard - and felt vaguely convinced that i 
was very much ill-used by somebody, or by everybody; i can't say 
which. 
"i am glad of one thing," said biddy, "and that is, that you have 
felt you could give me your confidence, pip. and i am glad of 
another thing, and that is, that of course you know you may depend 
upon my keeping it and always so far deserving it. if your first 
teacher (dear! such a poor one, and so much in need of being taught 
herself!) had been your teacher at the present time, she thinks she 
knows what lesson she would set. but it would be a hard one to 
learn, and you have got beyond her, and it's of no use now." so, 
with a quiet sigh for me, biddy rose from the bank, and said, with 
a fresh and pleasant change of voice, "shall we walk a little 
further, or go home?" 
"biddy," i cried, getting up, putting my arm round her neck, and 
giving her a kiss, "i shall always tell you everything." 
"till you're a gentleman," said biddy. 
"you know i never shall be, so that's always. not that i have any 
occasion to tell you anything, for you know everything i know - as 
i told you at home the other night." 
"ah!" said biddy, quite in a whisper, as she looked away at the 
ships. and then repeated, with her former pleasant change; "shall 
we walk a little further, or go home?" 
i said to biddy we would walk a little further, and we did so, and 
the summer afternoon toned down into the summer evening, and it was 
very beautiful. i began to consider whether i was not more 
naturally and wholesomely situated, after all, in these 
circumstances, than playing beggar my neighbour by candlelight in 
the room with the stopped clocks, and being despised by estella. i 
thought it would be very good for me if i could get her out of my 
head, with all the rest of those remembrances and fancies, and 
could go to work determined to relish what i had to do, and stick 
to it, and make the best of it. i asked myself the question whether 
i did not surely know that if estella were beside me at that moment 
instead of biddy, she would make me miserable? i was obliged to 
admit that i did know it for a certainty, and i said to myself, 
"pip, what a fool you are!" 
we talked a good deal as we walked, and all that biddy said seemed 
right. biddy was never insulting, or capricious, or biddy to-day 
and somebody else to-morrow; she would have derived only pain, and 
no pleasure, from giving me pain; she would far rather have wounded 
her own breast than mine. how could it be, then, that i did not 
like her much the better of the two? 
"biddy," said i, when we were walking homeward, "i wish you could 
put me right." 
"i wish i could!" said biddy. 
"if i could only get myself to fall in love with you - you don't 
mind my speaking so openly to such an old acquaintance?" 
"oh dear, not at all!" said biddy. "don't mind me." 
"if i could only get myself to do it, that would be the thing for 
me." 
"but you never will, you see," said biddy. 
it did not appear quite so unlikely to me that evening, as it would 
have done if we had discussed it a few hours before. i therefore 
observed i was not quite sure of that. but biddy said she was, and 
she said it decisively. in my heart i believed her to be right; and 
yet i took it rather ill, too, that she should be so positive on 
the point. 
when we came near the churchyard, we had to cross an embankment, 
and get over a stile near a sluice gate. there started up, from the 
gate, or from the rushes, or from the ooze (which was quite in his 
stagnant way), old orlick. 
"halloa!" he growled, "where are you two going?" 
"where should we be going, but home?" 
"well then," said he, "i'm jiggered if i don't see you home!" 
this penalty of being jiggered was a favourite supposititious case 
of his. he attached no definite meaning to the word that i am aware 
of, but used it, like his own pretended christian name, to affront 
mankind, and convey an idea of something savagely damaging. when i 
was younger, i had had a general belief that if he had jiggered me 
personally, he would have done it with a sharp and twisted hook. 
biddy was much against his going with us, and said to me in a 
whisper, "don't let him come; i don't like him." as i did not like 
him either, i took the liberty of saying that we thanked him, but 
we didn't want seeing home. he received that piece of information 
with a yell of laughter, and dropped back, but came slouching after 
us at a little distance. 
curious to know whether biddy suspected him of having had a hand in 
that murderous attack of which my sister had never been able to 
give any account, i asked her why she did not like him. 
"oh!" she replied, glancing over her shoulder as he slouched after 
us, "because i - i am afraid he likes me." 
"did he ever tell you he liked you?" i asked, indignantly. 
"no," said biddy, glancing over her shoulder again, "he never told 
me so; but he dances at me, whenever he can catch my eye." 
however novel and peculiar this testimony of attachment, i did not 
doubt the accuracy of the interpretation. i was very hot indeed 
upon old orlick's daring to admire her; as hot as if it were an 
outrage on myself. 
"but it makes no difference to you, you know," said biddy, calmly. 
"no, biddy, it makes no difference to me; only i don't like it; i 
don't approve of it." 
"nor i neither," said biddy. "though that makes no difference to 
you." 
"exactly," said i; "but i must tell you i should have no opinion of 
you, biddy, if he danced at you with your own consent." 
i kept an eye on orlick after that night, and, whenever 
circumstances were favourable to his dancing at biddy, got before 
him, to obscure that demonstration. he had struck root in joe's 
establishment, by reason of my sister's sudden fancy for him, or i 
should have tried to get him dismissed. he quite understood and 
reciprocated my good intentions, as i had reason to know 
thereafter. 
and now, because my mind was not confused enough before, i 
complicated its confusion fifty thousand-fold, by having states and 
seasons when i was clear that biddy was immeasurably better than 
estella, and that the plain honest working life to which i was 
born, had nothing in it to be ashamed of, but offered me sufficient 
means of self-respect and happiness. at those times, i would decide 
conclusively that my disaffection to dear old joe and the forge, 
was gone, and that i was growing up in a fair way to be partners 
with joe and to keep company with biddy - when all in a moment some 
confounding remembrance of the havisham days would fall upon me, 
like a destructive missile, and scatter my wits again. scattered 
wits take a long time picking up; and often, before i had got them 
well together, they would be dispersed in all directions by one 
stray thought, that perhaps after all miss havisham was going to 
make my fortune when my time was out. 
if my time had run out, it would have left me still at the height 
of my perplexities, i dare say. it never did run out, however, but 
was brought to a premature end, as i proceed to relate. 
chapter 18 
it was in the fourth year of my apprenticeship to joe, and it was a 
saturday night. there was a group assembled round the fire at the 
three jolly bargemen, attentive to mr. wopsle as he read the 
newspaper aloud. of that group i was one. 
a highly popular murder had been committed, and mr. wopsle was 
imbrued in blood to the eyebrows. he gloated over every abhorrent 
adjective in the description, and identified himself with every 
witness at the inquest. he faintly moaned, "i am done for," as the 
victim, and he barbarously bellowed, "i'll serve you out," as the 
murderer. he gave the medical testimony, in pointed imitation of 
our local practitioner; and he piped and shook, as the aged 
turnpike-keeper who had heard blows, to an extent so very paralytic 
as to suggest a doubt regarding the mental competency of that 
witness. the coroner, in mr. wopsle's hands, became timon of athens; 
the beadle, coriolanus. he enjoyed himself thoroughly, and we all 
enjoyed ourselves, and were delightfully comfortable. in this cozy 
state of mind we came to the verdict wilful murder. 
then, and not sooner, i became aware of a strange gentleman leaning 
over the back of the settle opposite me, looking on. there was an 
expression of contempt on his face, and he bit the side of a great 
forefinger as he watched the group of faces. 
"well!" said the stranger to mr. wopsle, when the reading was done, 
"you have settled it all to your own satisfaction, i have no 
doubt?" 
everybody started and looked up, as if it were the murderer. he 
looked at everybody coldly and sarcastically. 
"guilty, of course?" said he. "out with it. come!" 
"sir," returned mr. wopsle, "without having the honour of your 
acquaintance, i do say guilty." upon this, we all took courage to 
unite in a confirmatory murmur. 
"i know you do," said the stranger; "i knew you would. i told you 
so. but now i'll ask you a question. do you know, or do you not 
know, that the law of england supposes every man to be innocent, 
until he is proved - proved - to be guilty?" 
"sir," mr. wopsle began to reply, "as an englishman myself, i-" 
"come!" said the stranger, biting his forefinger at him. "don't 
evade the question. either you know it, or you don't know it. which 
is it to be?" 
he stood with his head on one side and himself on one side, in a 
bullying interrogative manner, and he threw his forefinger at mr. 
wopsle - as it were to mark him out - before biting it again. 
"now!" said he. "do you know it, or don't you know it?" 
"certainly i know it," replied mr. wopsle. 
"certainly you know it. then why didn't you say so at first? now, 
i'll ask you another question;" taking possession of mr. wopsle, as 
if he had a right to him. "do you know that none of these witnesses 
have yet been cross-examined?" 
mr. wopsle was beginning, "i can only say-" when the stranger 
stopped him. 
"what? you won't answer the question, yes or no? now, i'll try you 
again." throwing his finger at him again. "attend to me. are you 
aware, or are you not aware, that none of these witnesses have yet 
been cross-examined? come, i only want one word from you. yes, or 
no?" 
mr. wopsle hesitated, and we all began to conceive rather a poor 
opinion of him. 
"come!" said the stranger, "i'll help you. you don't deserve help, 
but i'll help you. look at that paper you hold in your hand. what 
is it?" 
"what is it?" repeated mr. wopsle, eyeing it, much at a loss. 
"is it," pursued the stranger in his most sarcastic and suspicious 
manner, "the printed paper you have just been reading from?" 
"undoubtedly." 
"undoubtedly. now, turn to that paper, and tell me whether it 
distinctly states that the prisoner expressly said that his legal 
advisers instructed him altogether to reserve his defence?" 
"i read that just now," mr. wopsle pleaded. 
"never mind what you read just now, sir; i don't ask you what you 
read just now. you may read the lord's prayer backwards, if you 
like - and, perhaps, have done it before to-day. turn to the paper. 
no, no, no my friend; not to the top of the column; you know better 
than that; to the bottom, to the bottom." (we all began to think mr. 
wopsle full of subterfuge.) "well? have you found it?" 
"here it is," said mr. wopsle. 
"now, follow that passage with your eye, and tell me whether it 
distinctly states that the prisoner expressly said that he was 
instructed by his legal advisers wholly to reserve his defence? 
come! do you make that of it?" 
mr. wopsle answered, "those are not the exact words." 
"not the exact words!" repeated the gentleman, bitterly. "is that 
the exact substance?" 
"yes," said mr. wopsle. 
"yes," repeated the stranger, looking round at the rest of the 
company with his right hand extended towards the witness, wopsle. 
"and now i ask you what you say to the conscience of that man who, 
with that passage before his eyes, can lay his head upon his pillow 
after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty, unheard?" 
we all began to suspect that mr. wopsle was not the man we had 
thought him, and that he was beginning to be found out. 
"and that same man, remember," pursued the gentleman, throwing his 
finger at mr. wopsle heavily; "that same man might be summoned as a 
juryman upon this very trial, and, having thus deeply committed 
himself, might return to the bosom of his family and lay his head 
upon his pillow, after deliberately swearing that he would well and 
truly try the issue joined between our sovereign lord the king and 
the prisoner at the bar, and would a true verdict give according to 
the evidence, so help him god!" 
we were all deeply persuaded that the unfortunate wopsle had gone 
too far, and had better stop in his reckless career while there was 
yet time. 
the strange gentleman, with an air of authority not to be disputed, 
and with a manner expressive of knowing something secret about 
every one of us that would effectually do for each individual if he 
chose to disclose it, left the back of the settle, and came into 
the space between the two settles, in front of the fire, where he 
remained standing: his left hand in his pocket, and he biting the 
forefinger of his right. 
"from information i have received," said he, looking round at us as 
we all quailed before him, "i have reason to believe there is a 
blacksmith among you, by name joseph - or joe - gargery. which is 
the man?" 
"here is the man," said joe. 
the strange gentleman beckoned him out of his place, and joe went. 
"you have an apprentice," pursued the stranger, "commonly known as 
pip? is he here?" 
"i am here!" i cried. 
the stranger did not recognize me, but i recognized him as the 
gentleman i had met on the stairs, on the occasion of my second 
visit to miss havisham. i had known him the moment i saw him 
looking over the settle, and now that i stood confronting him with 
his hand upon my shoulder, i checked off again in detail, his large 
head, his dark complexion, his deep-set eyes, his bushy black 
eyebrows, his large watch-chain, his strong black dots of beard and 
whisker, and even the smell of scented soap on his great hand. 
"i wish to have a private conference with you two," said he, when 
he had surveyed me at his leisure. "it will take a little time. 
perhaps we had better go to your place of residence. i prefer not 
to anticipate my communication here; you will impart as much or as 
little of it as you please to your friends afterwards; i have 
nothing to do with that." 
amidst a wondering silence, we three walked out of the jolly 
bargemen, and in a wondering silence walked home. while going 
along, the strange gentleman occasionally looked at me, and 
occasionally bit the side of his finger. as we neared home, joe 
vaguely acknowledging the occasion as an impressive and ceremonious 
one, went on ahead to open the front door. our conference was held 
in the state parlour, which was feebly lighted by one candle. 
it began with the strange gentleman's sitting down at the table, 
drawing the candle to him, and looking over some entries in his 
pocket-book. he then put up the pocket-book and set the candle a 
little aside: after peering round it into the darkness at joe and 
me, to ascertain which was which. 
"my name," he said, "is jaggers, and i am a lawyer in london. i am 
pretty well known. i have unusual business to transact with you, 
and i commence by explaining that it is not of my originating. if 
my advice had been asked, i should not have been here. it was not 
asked, and you see me here. what i have to do as the confidential 
agent of another, i do. no less, no more." 
finding that he could not see us very well from where he sat, he 
got up, and threw one leg over the back of a chair and leaned upon 
it; thus having one foot on the seat of the chair, and one foot on 
the ground. 
"now, joseph gargery, i am the bearer of an offer to relieve you of 
this young fellow your apprentice. you would not object to cancel 
his indentures, at his request and for his good? you would want 
nothing for so doing?" 
"lord forbid that i should want anything for not standing in pip's 
way," said joe, staring. 
"lord forbidding is pious, but not to the purpose," returned mr 
jaggers. "the question is, would you want anything? do you want 
anything?" 
"the answer is," returned joe, sternly, "no." 
i thought mr. jaggers glanced at joe, as if he considered him a fool 
for his disinterestedness. but i was too much bewildered between 
breathless curiosity and surprise, to be sure of it. 
"very well," said mr. jaggers. "recollect the admission you have 
made, and don't try to go from it presently." 
"who's a-going to try?" retorted joe. 
"i don't say anybody is. do you keep a dog?" 
"yes, i do keep a dog." 
"bear in mind then, that brag is a good dog, but holdfast is a 
better. bear that in mind, will you?" repeated mr. jaggers, shutting 
his eyes and nodding his head at joe, as if he were forgiving him 
something. "now, i return to this young fellow. and the 
communication i have got to make is, that he has great 
expectations." 
joe and i gasped, and looked at one another. 
"i am instructed to communicate to him," said mr. jaggers, throwing 
his finger at me sideways, "that he will come into a handsome 
property. further, that it is the desire of the present possessor 
of that property, that he be immediately removed from his present 
sphere of life and from this place, and be brought up as a 
gentleman - in a word, as a young fellow of great expectations." 
my dream was out; my wild fancy was surpassed by sober reality; 
miss havisham was going to make my fortune on a grand scale. 
"now, mr. pip," pursued the lawyer, "i address the rest of what i 
have to say, to you. you are to understand, first, that it is the 
request of the person from whom i take my instructions, that you 
always bear the name of pip. you will have no objection, i dare 
say, to your great expectations being encumbered with that easy 
condition. but if you have any objection, this is the time to 
mention it." 
my heart was beating so fast, and there was such a singing in my 
ears, that i could scarcely stammer i had no objection. 
"i should think not! now you are to understand, secondly, mr. pip, 
that the name of the person who is your liberal benefactor remains 
a profound secret, until the person chooses to reveal it. i am 
empowered to mention that it is the intention of the person to 
reveal it at first hand by word of mouth to yourself. when or where 
that intention may be carried out, i cannot say; no one can say. it 
may be years hence. now, you are distinctly to understand that you 
are most positively prohibited from making any inquiry on this 
head, or any allusion or reference, however distant, to any 
individual whomsoever as the individual, in all the communications 
you may have with me. if you have a suspicion in your own breast, 
keep that suspicion in your own breast. it is not the least to the 
purpose what the reasons of this prohibition are; they may be the 
strongest and gravest reasons, or they may be mere whim. this is 
not for you to inquire into. the condition is laid down. your 
acceptance of it, and your observance of it as binding, is the only 
remaining condition that i am charged with, by the person from whom 
i take my instructions, and for whom i am not otherwise 
responsible. that person is the person from whom you derive your 
expectations, and the secret is solely held by that person and by 
me. again, not a very difficult condition with which to encumber 
such a rise in fortune; but if you have any objection to it, this 
is the time to mention it. speak out." 
once more, i stammered with difficulty that i had no objection. 
"i should think not! now, mr. pip, i have done with stipulations." 
though he called me mr. pip, and began rather to make up to me, he 
still could not get rid of a certain air of bullying suspicion; and 
even now he occasionally shut his eyes and threw his finger at me 
while he spoke, as much as to express that he knew all kinds of 
things to my disparagement, if he only chose to mention them. "we 
come next, to mere details of arrangement. you must know that, 
although i have used the term "expectations" more than once, you 
are not endowed with expectations only. there is already lodged in 
my hands, a sum of money amply sufficient for your suitable 
education and maintenance. you will please consider me your 
guardian. oh!" for i was going to thank him, "i tell you at once, i 
am paid for my services, or i shouldn't render them. it is 
considered that you must be better educated, in accordance with 
your altered position, and that you will be alive to the importance 
and necessity of at once entering on that advantage." 
i said i had always longed for it. 
"never mind what you have always longed for, mr. pip," he retorted; 
"keep to the record. if you long for it now, that's enough. am i 
answered that you are ready to be placed at once, under some proper 
tutor? is that it?" 
i stammered yes, that was it. 
"good. now, your inclinations are to be consulted. i don't think 
that wise, mind, but it's my trust. have you ever heard of any 
tutor whom you would prefer to another?" 
i had never heard of any tutor but biddy and mr. wopsle's greataunt; 
so, i replied in the negative. 
"there is a certain tutor, of whom i have some knowledge, who i 
think might suit the purpose," said mr. jaggers. "i don't recommend 
him, observe; because i never recommend anybody. the gentleman i 
speak of, is one mr. matthew pocket." 
ah! i caught at the name directly. miss havisham's relation. the 
matthew whom mr. and mrs. camilla had spoken of. the matthew whose 
place was to be at miss havisham's head, when she lay dead, in her 
bride's dress on the bride's table. 
"you know the name?" said mr. jaggers, looking shrewdly at me, and 
then shutting up his eyes while he waited for my answer. 
my answer was, that i had heard of the name. 
"oh!" said he. "you have heard of the name. but the question is, 
what do you say of it?" 
i said, or tried to say, that i was much obliged to him for his 
recommendation- 
"no, my young friend!" he interrupted, shaking his great head very 
slowly. "recollect yourself!" 
not recollecting myself, i began again that i was much obliged to 
him for his recommendation- 
"no, my young friend," he interrupted, shaking his head and 
frowning and smiling both at once; "no, no, no; it's very well 
done, but it won't do; you are too young to fix me with it. 
recommendation is not the word, mr. pip. try another." 
correcting myself, i said that i was much obliged to him for his 
mention of mr. matthew pocket- 
"that's more like it!" cried mr. jaggers. 
and (i added), i would gladly try that gentleman. 
"good. you had better try him in his own house. the way shall be 
prepared for you, and you can see his son first, who is in london. 
when will you come to london?" 
i said (glancing at joe, who stood looking on, motionless), that i 
supposed i could come directly. 
"first," said mr. jaggers, "you should have some new clothes to come 
in, and they should not be working clothes. say this day week. 
you'll want some money. shall i leave you twenty guineas?" 
he produced a long purse, with the greatest coolness, and counted 
them out on the table and pushed them over to me. this was the 
first time he had taken his leg from the chair. he sat astride of 
the chair when he had pushed the money over, and sat swinging his 
purse and eyeing joe. 
"well, joseph gargery? you look dumbfoundered?" 
"i am!" said joe, in a very decided manner. 
"it was understood that you wanted nothing for yourself, remember?" 
"it were understood," said joe. "and it are understood. and it ever 
will be similar according." 
"but what," said mr. jaggers, swinging his purse, "what if it was in 
my instructions to make you a present, as compensation?" 
"as compensation what for?" joe demanded. 
"for the loss of his services." 
joe laid his hand upon my shoulder with the touch of a woman. i 
have often thought him since, like the steam-hammer, that can crush 
a man or pat an egg-shell, in his combination of strength with 
gentleness. "pip is that hearty welcome," said joe, "to go free 
with his services, to honour and fortun', as no words can tell him. 
but if you think as money can make compensation to me for the loss 
of the little child - what come to the forge - and ever the best of 
friends!-" 
o dear good joe, whom i was so ready to leave and so unthankful to, 
i see you again, with your muscular blacksmith's arm before your 
eyes, and your broad chest heaving, and your voice dying away. o 
dear good faithful tender joe, i feel the loving tremble of your 
hand upon my arm, as solemnly this day as if it had been the rustle 
of an angel's wing! 
but i encouraged joe at the time. i was lost in the mazes of my 
future fortunes, and could not retrace the by-paths we had trodden 
together. i begged joe to be comforted, for (as he said) we had 
ever been the best of friends, and (as i said) we ever would be so. 
joe scooped his eyes with his disengaged wrist, as if he were bent 
on gouging himself, but said not another word. 
mr. jaggers had looked on at this, as one who recognized in joe the 
village idiot, and in me his keeper. when it was over, he said, 
weighing in his hand the purse he had ceased to swing: 
"now, joseph gargery, i warn you this is your last chance. no half 
measures with me. if you mean to take a present that i have it in 
charge to make you, speak out, and you shall have it. if on the 
contrary you mean to say-" here, to his great amazement, he was 
stopped by joe's suddenly working round him with every 
demonstration of a fell pugilistic purpose. 
"which i meantersay," cried joe, "that if you come into my place 
bull-baiting and badgering me, come out! which i meantersay as sech 
if you're a man, come on! which i meantersay that what i say, i 
meantersay and stand or fall by!" 
i drew joe away, and he immediately became placable; merely stating 
to me, in an obliging manner and as a polite expostulatory notice 
to any one whom it might happen to concern, that he were not a 
going to be bull-baited and badgered in his own place. mr. jaggers 
had risen when joe demonstrated, and had backed near the door. 
without evincing any inclination to come in again, he there 
delivered his valedictory remarks. they were these: 
"well, mr. pip, i think the sooner you leave here - as you are to be 
a gentleman - the better. let it stand for this day week, and you 
shall receive my printed address in the meantime. you can take a 
hackney-coach at the stage-coach office in london, and come 
straight to me. understand, that i express no opinion, one way or 
other, on the trust i undertake. i am paid for undertaking it, and 
i do so. now, understand that, finally. understand that!" 
he was throwing his finger at both of us, and i think would have 
gone on, but for his seeming to think joe dangerous, and going off. 
something came into my head which induced me to run after him, as 
he was going down to the jolly bargemen where he had left a hired 
carriage. 
"i beg your pardon, mr. jaggers." 
"halloa!" said he, facing round, "what's the matter?" 
"i wish to be quite right, mr. jaggers, and to keep to your 
directions; so i thought i had better ask. would there be any 
objection to my taking leave of any one i know, about here, before 
i go away?" 
"no," said he, looking as if he hardly understood me. 
"i don't mean in the village only, but up-town?" 
"no," said he. "no objection." 
i thanked him and ran home again, and there i found that joe had 
already locked the front door and vacated the state parlour, and 
was seated by the kitchen fire with a hand on each knee, gazing 
intently at the burning coals. i too sat down before the fire and 
gazed at the coals, and nothing was said for a long time. 
my sister was in her cushioned chair in her corner, and biddy sat 
at her needlework before the fire, and joe sat next biddy, and i 
sat next joe in the corner opposite my sister. the more i looked 
into the glowing coals, the more incapable i became of looking at 
joe; the longer the silence lasted, the more unable i felt to 
speak. 
at length i got out, "joe, have you told biddy?" 
"no, pip," returned joe, still looking at the fire, and holding his 
knees tight, as if he had private information that they intended to 
make off somewhere, "which i left it to yourself, pip." 
"i would rather you told, joe." 
"pip's a gentleman of fortun' then," said joe, "and god bless him 
in it!" 
biddy dropped her work, and looked at me. joe held his knees and 
looked at me. i looked at both of them. after a pause, they both 
heartily congratulated me; but there was a certain touch of sadness 
in their congratulations, that i rather resented. 
i took it upon myself to impress biddy (and through biddy, joe) 
with the grave obligation i considered my friends under, to know 
nothing and say nothing about the maker of my fortune. it would all 
come out in good time, i observed, and in the meanwhile nothing was 
to be said, save that i had come into great expectations from a 
mysterious patron. biddy nodded her head thoughtfully at the fire 
as she took up her work again, and said she would be very 
particular; and joe, still detaining his knees, said, "ay, ay, i'll 
be ekervally partickler, pip;" and then they congratulated me 
again, and went on to express so much wonder at the notion of my 
being a gentleman, that i didn't half like it. 
infinite pains were then taken by biddy to convey to my sister some 
idea of what had happened. to the best of my belief, those efforts 
entirely failed. she laughed and nodded her head a great many 
times, and even repeated after biddy, the words "pip" and 
"property." but i doubt if they had more meaning in them than an 
election cry, and i cannot suggest a darker picture of her state of 
mind. 
i never could have believed it without experience, but as joe and 
biddy became more at their cheerful ease again, i became quite 
gloomy. dissatisfied with my fortune, of course i could not be; but 
it is possible that i may have been, without quite knowing it, 
dissatisfied with myself. 
anyhow, i sat with my elbow on my knee and my face upon my hand, 
looking into the fire, as those two talked about my going away, and 
about what they should do without me, and all that. and whenever i 
caught one of them looking at me, though never so pleasantly (and 
they often looked at me - particularly biddy), i felt offended: as 
if they were expressing some mistrust of me. though heaven knows 
they never did by word or sign. 
at those times i would get up and look out at the door; for, our 
kitchen door opened at once upon the night, and stood open on 
summer evenings to air the room. the very stars to which i then 
raised my eyes, i am afraid i took to be but poor and humble stars 
for glittering on the rustic objects among which i had passed my 
life. 
"saturday night," said i, when we sat at our supper of 
bread-and-cheese and beer. "five more days, and then the day before 
the day! they'll soon go." 
"yes, pip," observed joe, whose voice sounded hollow in his beer 
mug. "they'll soon go." 
"soon, soon go," said biddy. 
"i have been thinking, joe, that when i go down town on monday, and 
order my new clothes, i shall tell the tailor that i'll come and 
put them on there, or that i'll have them sent to mr. pumblechook's. 
it would be very disagreeable to be stared at by all the people 
here." 
"mr. and mrs. hubble might like to see you in your new genteel figure 
too, pip," said joe, industriously cutting his bread, with his 
cheese on it, in the palm of his left hand, and glancing at my 
untasted supper as if he thought of the time when we used to 
compare slices. "so might wopsle. and the jolly bargemen might take 
it as a compliment." 
"that's just what i don't want, joe. they would make such a 
business of it - such a coarse and common business - that i 
couldn't bear myself." 
"ah, that indeed, pip!" said joe. "if you couldn't abear 
yourself-" 
biddy asked me here, as she sat holding my sister's plate, "have 
you thought about when you'll show yourself to mr. gargery, and your 
sister, and me? you will show yourself to us; won't you?" 
"biddy," i returned with some resentment, "you are so exceedingly 
quick that it's difficult to keep up with you." 
("she always were quick," observed joe.) 
"if you had waited another moment, biddy, you would have heard me 
say that i shall bring my clothes here in a bundle one evening - 
most likely on the evening before i go away." 
biddy said no more. handsomely forgiving her, i soon exchanged an 
affectionate good-night with her and joe, and went up to bed. when 
i got into my little room, i sat down and took a long look at it, 
as a mean little room that i should soon be parted from and raised 
above, for ever, it was furnished with fresh young remembrances 
too, and even at the same moment i fell into much the same confused 
division of mind between it and the better rooms to which i was 
going, as i had been in so often between the forge and miss 
havisham's, and biddy and estella. 
the sun had been shining brightly all day on the roof of my attic, 
and the room was warm. as i put the window open and stood looking 
out, i saw joe come slowly forth at the dark door below, and take a 
turn or two in the air; and then i saw biddy come, and bring him a 
pipe and light it for him. he never smoked so late, and it seemed 
to hint to me that he wanted comforting, for some reason or other. 
he presently stood at the door immediately beneath me, smoking his 
pipe, and biddy stood there too, quietly talking to him, and i knew 
that they talked of me, for i heard my name mentioned in an 
endearing tone by both of them more than once. i would not have 
listened for more, if i could have heard more: so, i drew away from 
the window, and sat down in my one chair by the bedside, feeling it 
very sorrowful and strange that this first night of my bright 
fortunes should be the loneliest i had ever known. 
looking towards the open window, i saw light wreaths from joe's 
pipe floating there, and i fancied it was like a blessing from joe 
not obtruded on me or paraded before me, but pervading the air we 
shared together. i put my light out, and crept into bed; and it was 
an uneasy bed now, and i never slept the old sound sleep in it any 
more. 
chapter 19 
morning made a considerable difference in my general prospect of 
life, and brightened it so much that it scarcely seemed the same. 
what lay heaviest on my mind, was, the consideration that six days 
intervened between me and the day of departure; for, i could not 
divest myself of a misgiving that something might happen to london 
in the meanwhile, and that, when i got there, it would be either 
greatly deteriorated or clean gone. 
joe and biddy were very sympathetic and pleasant when i spoke of 
our approaching separation; but they only referred to it when i 
did. after breakfast, joe brought out my indentures from the press 
in the best parlour, and we put them in the fire, and i felt that i 
was free. with all the novelty of my emancipation on me, i went to 
church with joe, and thought, perhaps the clergyman wouldn't have 
read that about the rich man and the kingdom of heaven, if he had 
known all. 
after our early dinner i strolled out alone, purposing to finish 
off the marshes at once, and get them done with. as i passed the 
church, i felt (as i had felt during service in the morning) a 
sublime compassion for the poor creatures who were destined to go 
there, sunday after sunday, all their lives through, and to lie 
obscurely at last among the low green mounds. i promised myself 
that i would do something for them one of these days, and formed a 
plan in outline for bestowing a dinner of roast-beef and 
plumpudding, a pint of ale, and a gallon of condescension, upon 
everybody in the village. 
if i had often thought before, with something allied to shame, of 
my companionship with the fugitive whom i had once seen limping 
among those graves, what were my thoughts on this sunday, when the 
place recalled the wretch, ragged and shivering, with his felon 
iron and badge! my comfort was, that it happened a long time ago, 
and that he had doubtless been transported a long way off, and that 
he was dead to me, and might be veritably dead into the bargain. 
no more low wet grounds, no more dykes and sluices, no more of 
these grazing cattle - though they seemed, in their dull manner, to 
wear a more respectful air now, and to face round, in order that 
they might stare as long as possible at the possessor of such great 
expectations - farewell, monotonous acquaintances of my childhood, 
henceforth i was for london and greatness: not for smith's work in 
general and for you! i made my exultant way to the old battery, 
and, lying down there to consider the question whether miss 
havisham intended me for estella, fell asleep. 
when i awoke, i was much surprised to find joe sitting beside me, 
smoking his pipe. he greeted me with a cheerful smile on my opening 
my eyes, and said: 
"as being the last time, pip, i thought i'd foller." 
"and joe, i am very glad you did so." 
"thankee, pip." 
"you may be sure, dear joe," i went on, after we had shaken hands, 
"that i shall never forget you." 
"no, no, pip!" said joe, in a comfortable tone, "i'm sure of that. 
ay, ay, old chap! bless you, it were only necessary to get it well 
round in a man's mind, to be certain on it. but it took a bit of 
time to get it well round, the change come so oncommon plump; 
didn't it?" 
somehow, i was not best pleased with joe's being so mightily secure 
of me. i should have liked him to have betrayed emotion, or to have 
said, "it does you credit, pip," or something of that sort. 
therefore, i made no remark on joe's first head: merely saying as 
to his second, that the tidings had indeed come suddenly, but that 
i had always wanted to be a gentleman, and had often and often 
speculated on what i would do, if i were one. 
"have you though?" said joe. "astonishing!" 
"it's a pity now, joe," said i, "that you did not get on a little 
more, when we had our lessons here; isn't it?" 
"well, i don't know," returned joe. "i'm so awful dull. i'm only 
master of my own trade. it were always a pity as i was so awful 
dull; but it's no more of a pity now, than it was - this day 
twelvemonth - don't you see?" 
what i had meant was, that when i came into my property and was 
able to do something for joe, it would have been much more 
agreeable if he had been better qualified for a rise in station. he 
was so perfectly innocent of my meaning, however, that i thought i 
would mention it to biddy in preference. 
so, when we had walked home and had had tea, i took biddy into our 
little garden by the side of the lane, and, after throwing out in a 
general way for the elevation of her spirits, that i should never 
forget her, said i had a favour to ask of her. 
"and it is, biddy," said i, "that you will not omit any opportunity 
of helping joe on, a little." 
"how helping him on?" asked biddy, with a steady sort of glance. 
"well! joe is a dear good fellow - in fact, i think he is the 
dearest fellow that ever lived - but he is rather backward in some 
things. for instance, biddy, in his learning and his manners." 
although i was looking at biddy as i spoke, and although she opened 
her eyes very wide when i had spoken, she did not look at me. 
"oh, his manners! won't his manners do, then?" asked biddy, 
plucking a black-currant leaf. 
"my dear biddy, they do very well here-" 
"oh! they do very well here?" interrupted biddy, looking closely at 
the leaf in her hand. 
"hear me out - but if i were to remove joe into a higher sphere, as 
i shall hope to remove him when i fully come into my property, they 
would hardly do him justice." 
"and don't you think he knows that?" asked biddy. 
it was such a very provoking question (for it had never in the most 
distant manner occurred to me), that i said, snappishly, "biddy, 
what do you mean?" 
biddy having rubbed the leaf to pieces between her hands - and the 
smell of a black-currant bush has ever since recalled to me that 
evening in the little garden by the side of the lane - said, "have 
you never considered that he may be proud?" 
"proud?" i repeated, with disdainful emphasis. 
"oh! there are many kinds of pride," said biddy, looking full at me 
and shaking her head; "pride is not all of one kind-" 
"well? what are you stopping for?" said i. 
"not all of one kind," resumed biddy. "he may be too proud to let 
any one take him out of a place that he is competent to fill, and 
fills well and with respect. to tell you the truth, i think he is: 
though it sounds bold in me to say so, for you must know him far 
better than i do." 
"now, biddy," said i, "i am very sorry to see this in you. i did 
not expect to see this in you. you are envious, biddy, and 
grudging. you are dissatisfied on account of my rise in fortune, 
and you can't help showing it." 
"if you have the heart to think so," returned biddy, "say so. say 
so over and over again, if you have the heart to think so." 
"if you have the heart to be so, you mean, biddy," said i, in a 
virtuous and superior tone; "don't put it off upon me. i am very 
sorry to see it, and it's a - it's a bad side of human nature. i 
did intend to ask you to use any little opportunities you might 
have after i was gone, of improving dear joe. but after this, i ask 
you nothing. i am extremely sorry to see this in you, biddy," i 
repeated. "it's a - it's a bad side of human nature." 
"whether you scold me or approve of me," returned poor biddy, "you 
may equally depend upon my trying to do all that lies in my power, 
here, at all times. and whatever opinion you take away of me, shall 
make no difference in my remembrance of you. yet a gentleman should 
not be unjust neither," said biddy, turning away her head. 
i again warmly repeated that it was a bad side of human nature (in 
which sentiment, waiving its application, i have since seen reason 
to think i was right), and i walked down the little path away from 
biddy, and biddy went into the house, and i went out at the garden 
gate and took a dejected stroll until supper-time; again feeling it 
very sorrowful and strange that this, the second night of my bright 
fortunes, should be as lonely and unsatisfactory as the first. 
but, morning once more brightened my view, and i extended my 
clemency to biddy, and we dropped the subject. putting on the best 
clothes i had, i went into town as early as i could hope to find 
the shops open, and presented myself before mr. trabb, the tailor: 
who was having his breakfast in the parlour behind his shop, and 
who did not think it worth his while to come out to me, but called 
me in to him. 
"well!" said mr. trabb, in a hail-fellow-well-met kind of way. "how 
are you, and what can i do for you?" 
mr. trabb had sliced his hot roll into three feather beds, and was 
slipping butter in between the blankets, and covering it up. he was 
a prosperous old bachelor, and his open window looked into a 
prosperous little garden and orchard, and there was a prosperous 
iron safe let into the wall at the side of his fireplace, and i did 
not doubt that heaps of his prosperity were put away in it in bags. 
"mr. trabb," said i, "it's an unpleasant thing to have to mention, 
because it looks like boasting; but i have come into a handsome 
property." 
a change passed over mr. trabb. he forgot the butter in bed, got up 
from the bedside, and wiped his fingers on the table-cloth, 
exclaiming, "lord bless my soul!" 
"i am going up to my guardian in london," said i, casually drawing 
some guineas out of my pocket and looking at them; "and i want a 
fashionable suit of clothes to go in. i wish to pay for them," i 
added - otherwise i thought he might only pretend to make them - 
"with ready money." 
"my dear sir," said mr. trabb, as he respectfully bent his body, 
opened his arms, and took the liberty of touching me on the outside 
of each elbow, "don't hurt me by mentioning that. may i venture to 
congratulate you? would you do me the favour of stepping into the 
shop?" 
mr. trabb's boy was the most audacious boy in all that countryside. 
when i had entered he was sweeping the shop, and he had sweetened 
his labours by sweeping over me. he was still sweeping when i came 
out into the shop with mr. trabb, and he knocked the broom against 
all possible corners and obstacles, to express (as i understood it) 
equality with any blacksmith, alive or dead. 
"hold that noise," said mr. trabb, with the greatest sternness, "or 
i'll knock your head off! do me the favour to be seated, sir. now, 
this," said mr. trabb, taking down a roll of cloth, and tiding it 
out in a flowing manner over the counter, preparatory to getting 
his hand under it to show the gloss, "is a very sweet article. i 
can recommend it for your purpose, sir, because it really is extra 
super. but you shall see some others. give me number four, you!" 
(to the boy, and with a dreadfully severe stare: foreseeing the 
danger of that miscreant's brushing me with it, or making some 
other sign of familiarity.) 
mr. trabb never removed his stern eye from the boy until he had 
deposited number four on the counter and was at a safe distance 
again. then, he commanded him to bring number five, and number 
eight. "and let me have none of your tricks here," said mr. trabb, 
"or you shall repent it, you young scoundrel, the longest day you 
have to live." 
mr. trabb then bent over number four, and in a sort of deferential 
confidence recommended it to me as a light article for summer wear, 
an article much in vogue among the nobility and gentry, an article 
that it would ever be an honour to him to reflect upon a 
distinguished fellow-townsman's (if he might claim me for a 
fellow-townsman) having worn. "are you bringing numbers five and 
eight, you vagabond," said mr. trabb to the boy after that, "or 
shall i kick you out of the shop and bring them myself?" 
i selected the materials for a suit, with the assistance of mr. 
trabb's judgment, and re-entered the parlour to be measured. for, 
although mr. trabb had my measure already, and had previously been 
quite contented with it, he said apologetically that it "wouldn't 
do under existing circumstances, sir - wouldn't do at all." so, mr. 
trabb measured and calculated me, in the parlour, as if i were an 
estate and he the finest species of surveyor, and gave himself such 
a world of trouble that i felt that no suit of clothes could 
possibly remunerate him for his pains. when he had at last done and 
had appointed to send the articles to mr. pumblechook's on the 
thursday evening, he said, with his hand upon the parlour lock, "i 
know, sir, that london gentlemen cannot be expected to patronize 
local work, as a rule; but if you would give me a turn now and then 
in the quality of a townsman, i should greatly esteem it. good 
morning, sir, much obliged. - door!" 
the last word was flung at the boy, who had not the least notion 
what it meant. but i saw him collapse as his master rubbed me out 
with his hands, and my first decided experience of the stupendous 
power of money, was, that it had morally laid upon his back, 
trabb's boy. 
after this memorable event, i went to the hatter's, and the 
bootmaker's, and the hosier's, and felt rather like mother 
hubbard's dog whose outfit required the services of so many trades. 
i also went to the coach-office and took my place for seven o'clock 
on saturday morning. it was not necessary to explain everywhere 
that i had come into a handsome property; but whenever i said 
anything to that effect, it followed that the officiating tradesman 
ceased to have his attention diverted through the window by the 
high-street, and concentrated his mind upon me. when i had ordered 
everything i wanted, i directed my steps towards pumblechook's, 
and, as i approached that gentleman's place of business, i saw him 
standing at his door. 
he was waiting for me with great impatience. he had been out early 
in the chaise-cart, and had called at the forge and heard the 
news. he had prepared a collation for me in the barnwell parlour, 
and he too ordered his shopman to "come out of the gangway" as my 
sacred person passed. 
"my dear friend," said mr. pumblechook, taking me by both hands, 
when he and i and the collation were alone, "i give you joy of your 
good fortune. well deserved, well deserved!" 
this was coming to the point, and i thought it a sensible way of 
expressing himself. 
"to think," said mr. pumblechook, after snorting admiration at me 
for some moments, "that i should have been the humble instrument of 
leading up to this, is a proud reward." 
i begged mr. pumblechook to remember that nothing was to be ever 
said or hinted, on that point. 
"my dear young friend," said mr. pumblechook, "if you will allow me 
to call you so-" 
i murmured "certainly," and mr. pumblechook took me by both hands 
again, and communicated a movement to his waistcoat, which had an 
emotional appearance, though it was rather low down, "my dear young 
friend, rely upon my doing my little all in your absence, by 
keeping the fact before the mind of joseph. - joseph!" said mr. 
pumblechook, in the way of a compassionate adjuration. "joseph!! 
joseph!!!" thereupon he shook his head and tapped it, expressing 
his sense of deficiency in joseph. 
"but my dear young friend," said mr. pumblechook, "you must be 
hungry, you must be exhausted. be seated. here is a chicken had 
round from the boar, here is a tongue had round from the boar, 
here's one or two little things had round from the boar, that i 
hope you may not despise. but do i," said mr. pumblechook, getting 
up again the moment after he had sat down, "see afore me, him as i 
ever sported with in his times of happy infancy? and may i - may 
i - ?" 
this may i, meant might he shake hands? i consented, and he was 
fervent, and then sat down again. 
"here is wine," said mr. pumblechook. "let us drink, thanks to 
fortune, and may she ever pick out her favourites with equal 
judgment! and yet i cannot," said mr. pumblechook, getting up again, 
"see afore me one - and likewise drink to one - without again 
expressing - may i - may i - ?" 
i said he might, and he shook hands with me again, and emptied his 
glass and turned it upside down. i did the same; and if i had 
turned myself upside down before drinking, the wine could not have 
gone more direct to my head. 
mr. pumblechook helped me to the liver wing, and to the best slice 
of tongue (none of those out-of-the-way no thoroughfares of pork 
now), and took, comparatively speaking, no care of himself at all. 
"ah! poultry, poultry! you little thought," said mr. pumblechook, 
apostrophizing the fowl in the dish, "when you was a young 
fledgling, what was in store for you. you little thought you was to 
be refreshment beneath this humble roof for one as - call it a 
weakness, if you will," said mr. pumblechook, getting up again, "but 
may i? may i - ?" 
it began to be unnecessary to repeat the form of saying he might, 
so he did it at once. how he ever did it so often without wounding 
himself with my knife, i don't know. 
"and your sister," he resumed, after a little steady eating, "which 
had the honour of bringing you up by hand! it's a sad picter, to 
reflect that she's no longer equal to fully understanding the 
honour. may-" 
i saw he was about to come at me again, and i stopped him. 
"we'll drink her health," said i. 
"ah!" cried mr. pumblechook, leaning back in his chair, quite 
flaccid with admiration, "that's the way you know 'em, sir!" (i 
don't know who sir was, but he certainly was not i, and there was 
no third person present); "that's the way you know the nobleminded, 
sir! ever forgiving and ever affable. it might," said the servile 
pumblechook, putting down his untasted glass in a hurry and getting 
up again, "to a common person, have the appearance of repeating - 
but may i - ?" 
when he had done it, he resumed his seat and drank to my sister. 
"let us never be blind," said mr. pumblechook, "to her faults of 
temper, but it is to be hoped she meant well." 
at about this time, i began to observe that he was getting flushed 
in the face; as to myself, i felt all face, steeped in wine and 
smarting. 
i mentioned to mr. pumblechook that i wished to have my new clothes 
sent to his house, and he was ecstatic on my so distinguishing him. 
i mentioned my reason for desiring to avoid observation in the 
village, and he lauded it to the skies. there was nobody but 
himself, he intimated, worthy of my confidence, and - in short, 
might he? then he asked me tenderly if i remembered our boyish 
games at sums, and how we had gone together to have me bound 
apprentice, and, in effect, how he had ever been my favourite fancy 
and my chosen friend? if i had taken ten times as many glasses of 
wine as i had, i should have known that he never had stood in that 
relation towards me, and should in my heart of hearts have 
repudiated the idea. yet for all that, i remember feeling convinced 
that i had been much mistaken in him, and that he was a sensible 
practical good-hearted prime fellow. 
by degrees he fell to reposing such great confidence in me, as to 
ask my advice in reference to his own affairs. he mentioned that 
there was an opportunity for a great amalgamation and monopoly of 
the corn and seed trade on those premises, if enlarged, such as had 
never occurred before in that, or any other neighbourhood. what 
alone was wanting to the realization of a vast fortune, he 
considered to be more capital. those were the two little words, 
more capital. now it appeared to him (pumblechook) that if that 
capital were got into the business, through a sleeping partner, sir 
which sleeping partner would have nothing to do but walk in, by 
self or deputy, whenever he pleased, and examine the books - and 
walk in twice a year and take his profits away in his pocket, to 
the tune of fifty per cent. - it appeared to him that that might be 
an opening for a young gentleman of spirit combined with property, 
which would be worthy of his attention. but what did i think? he 
had great confidence in my opinion, and what did i think? i gave it 
as my opinion. "wait a bit!" the united vastness and distinctness 
of this view so struck him, that he no longer asked if he might 
shake hands with me, but said he really must - and did. 
we drank all the wine, and mr. pumblechook pledged himself over and 
over again to keep joseph up to the mark (i don't know what mark), 
and to render me efficient and constant service (i don't know what 
service). he also made known to me for the first time in my life, 
and certainly after having kept his secret wonderfully well, that 
he had always said of me, "that boy is no common boy, and mark me, 
his fortun' will be no common fortun'." he said with a tearful 
smile that it was a singular thing to think of now, and i said so 
too. finally, i went out into the air, with a dim perception that 
there was something unwonted in the conduct of the sunshine, and 
found that i had slumberously got to the turn-pike without having 
taken any account of the road. 
there, i was roused by mr. pumblechook's hailing me. he was a long 
way down the sunny street, and was making expressive gestures for 
me to stop. i stopped, and he came up breathless. 
"no, my dear friend," said he, when he had recovered wind for 
speech. "not if i can help it. this occasion shall not entirely 
pass without that affability on your part. - may i, as an old 
friend and well-wisher? may i?" 
we shook hands for the hundredth time at least, and he ordered a 
young carter out of my way with the greatest indignation. then, he 
blessed me and stood waving his hand to me until i had passed the 
crook in the road; and then i turned into a field and had a long 
nap under a hedge before i pursued my way home. 
i had scant luggage to take with me to london, for little of the 
little i possessed was adapted to my new station. but, i began 
packing that same afternoon, and wildly packed up things that i 
knew i should want next morning, in a fiction that there was not a 
moment to be lost. 
so, tuesday, wednesday, and thursday, passed; and on friday morning 
i went to mr. pumblechook's, to put on my new clothes and pay my 
visit to miss havisham. mr. pumblechook's own room was given up to 
me to dress in, and was decorated with clean towels expressly for 
the event. my clothes were rather a disappointment, of course. 
probably every new and eagerly expected garment ever put on since 
clothes came in, fell a trifle short of the wearer's expectation. 
but after i had had my new suit on, some half an hour, and had gone 
through an immensity of posturing with mr. pumblechook's very 
limited dressing-glass, in the futile endeavour to see my legs, it 
seemed to fit me better. it being market morning at a neighbouring 
town some ten miles off, mr. pumblechook was not at home. i had not 
told him exactly when i meant to leave, and was not likely to shake 
hands with him again before departing. this was all as it should 
be, and i went out in my new array: fearfully ashamed of having to 
pass the shopman, and suspicious after all that i was at a personal 
disadvantage, something like joe's in his sunday suit. 
i went circuitously to miss havisham's by all the back ways, and 
rang at the bell constrainedly, on account of the stiff long 
fingers of my gloves. sarah pocket came to the gate, and positively 
reeled back when she saw me so changed; her walnut-shell 
countenance likewise, turned from brown to green and yellow. 
"you?" said she. "you, good gracious! what do you want?" 
"i am going to london, miss pocket," said i, "and want to say 
good-bye to miss havisham." 
i was not expected, for she left me locked in the yard, while she 
went to ask if i were to be admitted. after a very short delay, she 
returned and took me up, staring at me all the way. 
miss havisham was taking exercise in the room with the long spread 
table, leaning on her crutch stick. the room was lighted as of 
yore, and at the sound of our entrance, she stopped and turned. she 
was then just abreast of the rotted bride-cake. 
"don't go, sarah," she said. "well, pip?" 
"i start for london, miss havisham, to-morrow," i was exceedingly 
careful what i said, "and i thought you would kindly not mind my 
taking leave of you." 
"this is a gay figure, pip," said she, making her crutch stick play 
round me, as if she, the fairy godmother who had changed me, were 
bestowing the finishing gift. 
"i have come into such good fortune since i saw you last, miss 
havisham," i murmured. "and i am so grateful for it, miss 
havisham!" 
"ay, ay!" said she, looking at the discomfited and envious sarah, 
with delight. "i have seen mr. jaggers. i have heard about it, pip. 
so you go to-morrow?" 
"yes, miss havisham." 
"and you are adopted by a rich person?" 
"yes, miss havisham." 
"not named?" 
"no, miss havisham." 
"and mr. jaggers is made your guardian?" 
"yes, miss havisham." 
she quite gloated on these questions and answers, so keen was her 
enjoyment of sarah pocket's jealous dismay. "well!" she went on; 
"you have a promising career before you. be good - deserve it - and 
abide by mr. jaggers's instructions." she looked at me, and looked 
at sarah, and sarah's countenance wrung out of her watchful face a 
cruel smile. "good-bye, pip! - you will always keep the name of 
pip, you know." 
"yes, miss havisham." 
"good-bye, pip!" 
she stretched out her hand, and i went down on my knee and put it 
to my lips. i had not considered how i should take leave of her; it 
came naturally to me at the moment, to do this. she looked at sarah 
pocket with triumph in her weird eyes, and so i left my fairy 
godmother, with both her hands on her crutch stick, standing in the 
midst of the dimly lighted room beside the rotten bridecake that 
was hidden in cobwebs. 
sarah pocket conducted me down, as if i were a ghost who must be 
seen out. she could not get over my appearance, and was in the last 
degree confounded. i said "good-bye, miss pocket;" but she merely 
stared, and did not seem collected enough to know that i had 
spoken. clear of the house, i made the best of my way back to 
pumblechook's, took off my new clothes, made them into a bundle, 
and went back home in my older dress, carrying it - to speak the 
truth - much more at my ease too, though i had the bundle to carry. 
and now, those six days which were to have run out so slowly, had 
run out fast and were gone, and to-morrow looked me in the face 
more steadily than i could look at it. as the six evenings had 
dwindled away, to five, to four, to three, to two, i had become 
more and more appreciative of the society of joe and biddy. on this 
last evening, i dressed my self out in my new clothes, for their 
delight, and sat in my splendour until bedtime. we had a hot supper 
on the occasion, graced by the inevitable roast fowl, and we had 
some flip to finish with. we were all very low, and none the higher 
for pretending to be in spirits. 
i was to leave our village at five in the morning, carrying my 
little hand-portmanteau, and i had told joe that i wished to walk 
away all alone. i am afraid - sore afraid - that this purpose 
originated in my sense of the contrast there would be between me 
and joe, if we went to the coach together. i had pretended with 
myself that there was nothing of this taint in the arrangement; but 
when i went up to my little room on this last night, i felt 
compelled to admit that it might be so, and had an impulse upon me 
to go down again and entreat joe to walk with me in the morning. i 
did not. 
all night there were coaches in my broken sleep, going to wrong 
places instead of to london, and having in the traces, now dogs, 
now cats, now pigs, now men - never horses. fantastic failures of 
journeys occupied me until the day dawned and the birds were 
singing. then, i got up and partly dressed, and sat at the window 
to take a last look out, and in taking it fell asleep. 
biddy was astir so early to get my breakfast, that, although i did 
not sleep at the window an hour, i smelt the smoke of the kitchen 
fire when i started up with a terrible idea that it must be late in 
the afternoon. but long after that, and long after i had heard the 
clinking of the teacups and was quite ready, i wanted the 
resolution to go down stairs. after all, i remained up there, 
repeatedly unlocking and unstrapping my small portmanteau and 
locking and strapping it up again, until biddy called to me that i 
was late. 
it was a hurried breakfast with no taste in it. i got up from the 
meal, saying with a sort of briskness, as if it had only just 
occurred to me, "well! i suppose i must be off!" and then i kissed 
my sister who was laughing and nodding and shaking in her usual 
chair, and kissed biddy, and threw my arms around joe's neck. then 
i took up my little portmanteau and walked out. the last i saw of 
them was, when i presently heard a scuffle behind me, and looking 
back, saw joe throwing an old shoe after me and biddy throwing 
another old shoe. i stopped then, to wave my hat, and dear old joe 
waved his strong right arm above his head, crying huskily 
"hooroar!" and biddy put her apron to her face. 
i walked away at a good pace, thinking it was easier to go than i 
had supposed it would be, and reflecting that it would never have 
done to have had an old shoe thrown after the coach, in sight of 
all the high-street. i whistled and made nothing of going. but the 
village was very peaceful and quiet, and the light mists were 
solemnly rising, as if to show me the world, and i had been so 
innocent and little there, and all beyond was so unknown and great, 
that in a moment with a strong heave and sob i broke into tears. it 
was by the finger-post at the end of the village, and i laid my 
hand upon it, and said, "good-bye o my dear, dear friend!" 
heaven knows we need never be ashamed of our tears, for they are 
rain upon the blinding dust of earth, overlying our hard hearts. i 
was better after i had cried, than before - more sorry, more aware 
of my own ingratitude, more gentle. if i had cried before, i should 
have had joe with me then. 
so subdued i was by those tears, and by their breaking out again in 
the course of the quiet walk, that when i was on the coach, and it 
was clear of the town, i deliberated with an aching heart whether i 
would not get down when we changed horses and walk back, and have 
another evening at home, and a better parting. we changed, and i 
had not made up my mind, and still reflected for my comfort that it 
would be quite practicable to get down and walk back, when we 
changed again. and while i was occupied with these deliberations, i 
would fancy an exact resemblance to joe in some man coming along 
the road towards us, and my heart would beat high. - as if he could 
possibly be there! 
we changed again, and yet again, and it was now too late and too 
far to go back, and i went on. and the mists had all solemnly risen 
now, and the world lay spread before me. 
this is the end of the first stage of pip's expectations. 
chapter 20 
the journey from our town to the metropolis, was a journey of about 
five hours. it was a little past mid-day when the fourhorse 
stage-coach by which i was a passenger, got into the ravel of 
traffic frayed out about the cross keys, wood-street, cheapside, 
london. 
we britons had at that time particularly settled that it was 
treasonable to doubt our having and our being the best of 
everything: otherwise, while i was scared by the immensity of 
london, i think i might have had some faint doubts whether it was 
not rather ugly, crooked, narrow, and dirty. 
mr. jaggers had duly sent me his address; it was, little britain, 
and he had written after it on his card, "just out of smithfield, 
and close by the coach-office." nevertheless, a hackney-coachman, 
who seemed to have as many capes to his greasy great-coat as he was 
years old, packed me up in his coach and hemmed me in with a 
folding and jingling barrier of steps, as if he were going to take 
me fifty miles. his getting on his box, which i remember to have 
been decorated with an old weather-stained pea-green hammercloth 
moth-eaten into rags, was quite a work of time. it was a wonderful 
equipage, with six great coronets outside, and ragged things behind 
for i don't know how many footmen to hold on by, and a harrow below 
them, to prevent amateur footmen from yielding to the temptation. 
i had scarcely had time to enjoy the coach and to think how like a 
straw-yard it was, and yet how like a rag-shop, and to wonder why 
the horses' nose-bags were kept inside, when i observed the 
coachman beginning to get down, as if we were going to stop 
presently. and stop we presently did, in a gloomy street, at 
certain offices with an open door, whereon was painted mr. jaggers. 
"how much?" i asked the coachman. 
the coachman answered, "a shilling - unless you wish to make it 
more." 
i naturally said i had no wish to make it more. 
"then it must be a shilling," observed the coachman. "i don't want 
to get into trouble. i know him!" he darkly closed an eye at mr 
jaggers's name, and shook his head. 
when he had got his shilling, and had in course of time completed 
the ascent to his box, and had got away (which appeared to relieve 
his mind), i went into the front office with my little portmanteau 
in my hand and asked, was mr. jaggers at home? 
"he is not," returned the clerk. "he is in court at present. am i 
addressing mr. pip?" 
i signified that he was addressing mr. pip. 
"mr. jaggers left word would you wait in his room. he couldn't say 
how long he might be, having a case on. but it stands to reason, 
his time being valuable, that he won't be longer than he can help." 
with those words, the clerk opened a door, and ushered me into an 
inner chamber at the back. here, we found a gentleman with one eye, 
in a velveteen suit and knee-breeches, who wiped his nose with his 
sleeve on being interrupted in the perusal of the newspaper. 
"go and wait outside, mike," said the clerk. 
i began to say that i hoped i was not interrupting - when the clerk 
shoved this gentleman out with as little ceremony as i ever saw 
used, and tossing his fur cap out after him, left me alone. 
mr. jaggers's room was lighted by a skylight only, and was a most 
dismal place; the skylight, eccentrically pitched like a broken 
head, and the distorted adjoining houses looking as if they had 
twisted themselves to peep down at me through it. there were not so 
many papers about, as i should have expected to see; and there were 
some odd objects about, that i should not have expected to see - 
such as an old rusty pistol, a sword in a scabbard, several 
strange-looking boxes and packages, and two dreadful casts on a 
shelf, of faces peculiarly swollen, and twitchy about the nose. mr. 
jaggers's own high-backed chair was of deadly black horse-hair, 
with rows of brass nails round it, like a coffin; and i fancied i 
could see how he leaned back in it, and bit his forefinger at the 
clients. the room was but small, and the clients seemed to have had 
a habit of backing up against the wall: the wall, especially 
opposite to mr. jaggers's chair, being greasy with shoulders. i 
recalled, too, that the one-eyed gentleman had shuffled forth 
against the wall when i was the innocent cause of his being turned 
out. 
i sat down in the cliental chair placed over against mr. jaggers's 
chair, and became fascinated by the dismal atmosphere of the place. 
i called to mind that the clerk had the same air of knowing 
something to everybody else's disadvantage, as his master had. i 
wondered how many other clerks there were up-stairs, and whether 
they all claimed to have the same detrimental mastery of their 
fellow-creatures. i wondered what was the history of all the odd 
litter about the room, and how it came there. i wondered whether 
the two swollen faces were of mr. jaggers's family, and, if he were 
so unfortunate as to have had a pair of such ill-looking relations, 
why he stuck them on that dusty perch for the blacks and flies to 
settle on, instead of giving them a place at home. of course i had 
no experience of a london summer day, and my spirits may have been 
oppressed by the hot exhausted air, and by the dust and grit that 
lay thick on everything. but i sat wondering and waiting in mr. 
jaggers's close room, until i really could not bear the two casts 
on the shelf above mr. jaggers's chair, and got up and went out. 
when i told the clerk that i would take a turn in the air while i 
waited, he advised me to go round the corner and i should come into 
smithfield. so, i came into smithfield; and the shameful place, 
being all asmear with filth and fat and blood and foam, seemed to 
stick to me. so, i rubbed it off with all possible speed by turning 
into a street where i saw the great black dome of saint paul's 
bulging at me from behind a grim stone building which a bystander 
said was newgate prison. following the wall of the jail, i found 
the roadway covered with straw to deaden the noise of passing 
vehicles; and from this, and from the quantity of people standing 
about, smelling strongly of spirits and beer, i inferred that the 
trials were on. 
while i looked about me here, an exceedingly dirty and partially 
drunk minister of justice asked me if i would like to step in and 
hear a trial or so: informing me that he could give me a front 
place for half-a-crown, whence i should command a full view of the 
lord chief justice in his wig and robes - mentioning that awful 
personage like waxwork, and presently offering him at the reduced 
price of eighteenpence. as i declined the proposal on the plea of 
an appointment, he was so good as to take me into a yard and show 
me where the gallows was kept, and also where people were publicly 
whipped, and then he showed me the debtors' door, out of which 
culprits came to be hanged: heightening the interest of that 
dreadful portal by giving me to understand that "four on 'em" would 
come out at that door the day after to-morrow at eight in the 
morning, to be killed in a row. this was horrible, and gave me a 
sickening idea of london: the more so as the lord chief justice's 
proprietor wore (from his hat down to his boots and up again to his 
pocket-handkerchief inclusive) mildewed clothes, which had 
evidently not belonged to him originally, and which, i took it into 
my head, he had bought cheap of the executioner. under these 
circumstances i thought myself well rid of him for a shilling. 
i dropped into the office to ask if mr. jaggers had come in yet, and 
i found he had not, and i strolled out again. this time, i made the 
tour of little britain, and turned into bartholomew close; and now 
i became aware that other people were waiting about for mr. jaggers, 
as well as i. there were two men of secret appearance lounging in 
bartholomew close, and thoughtfully fitting their feet into the 
cracks of the pavement as they talked together, one of whom said to 
the other when they first passed me, that "jaggers would do it if 
it was to be done." there was a knot of three men and two women 
standing at a corner, and one of the women was crying on her dirty 
shawl, and the other comforted her by saying, as she pulled her own 
shawl over her shoulders, "jaggers is for him, 'melia, and what 
more could you have?" there was a red-eyed little jew who came into 
the close while i was loitering there, in company with a second 
little jew whom he sent upon an errand; and while the messenger was 
gone, i remarked this jew, who was of a highly excitable 
temperament, performing a jig of anxiety under a lamp-post and 
accompanying himself, in a kind of frenzy, with the words, "oh 
jaggerth, jaggerth, jaggerth! all otherth ith cag-maggerth, give me 
jaggerth!" these testimonies to the popularity of my guardian made 
a deep impression on me, and i admired and wondered more than ever. 
at length, as i was looking out at the iron gate of bartholomew 
close into little britain, i saw mr. jaggers coming across the road 
towards me. all the others who were waiting, saw him at the same 
time, and there was quite a rush at him. mr. jaggers, putting a hand 
on my shoulder and walking me on at his side without saying 
anything to me, addressed himself to his followers. 
first, he took the two secret men. 
"now, i have nothing to say to you," said mr. jaggers, throwing his 
finger at them. "i want to know no more than i know. as to the 
result, it's a toss-up. i told you from the first it was a toss-up. 
have you paid wemmick?" 
"we made the money up this morning, sir," said one of the men, 
submissively, while the other perused mr. jaggers's face. 
"i don't ask you when you made it up, or where, or whether you made 
it up at all. has wemmick got it?" 
"yes, sir," said both the men together. 
"very well; then you may go. now, i won't have it!" said mr 
jaggers, waving his hand at them to put them behind him. "if you 
say a word to me, i'll throw up the case." 
"we thought, mr. jaggers-" one of the men began, pulling off his 
hat. 
"that's what i told you not to do," said mr. jaggers. "you thought! 
i think for you; that's enough for you. if i want you, i know where 
to find you; i don't want you to find me. now i won't have it. i 
won't hear a word." 
the two men looked at one another as mr. jaggers waved them behind 
again, and humbly fell back and were heard no more. 
"and now you!" said mr. jaggers, suddenly stopping, and turning on 
the two women with the shawls, from whom the three men had meekly 
separated. - "oh! amelia, is it?" 
"yes, mr. jaggers." 
"and do you remember," retorted mr. jaggers, "that but for me you 
wouldn't be here and couldn't be here?" 
"oh yes, sir!" exclaimed both women together. "lord bless you, sir, 
well we knows that!" 
"then why," said mr. jaggers, "do you come here?" 
"my bill, sir!" the crying woman pleaded. 
"now, i tell you what!" said mr. jaggers. "once for all. if you 
don't know that your bill's in good hands, i know it. and if you 
come here, bothering about your bill, i'll make an example of both 
your bill and you, and let him slip through my fingers. have you 
paid wemmick?" 
"oh yes, sir! every farden." 
"very well. then you have done all you have got to do. say another 
word - one single word - and wemmick shall give you your money 
back." 
this terrible threat caused the two women to fall off immediately. 
no one remained now but the excitable jew, who had already raised 
the skirts of mr. jaggers's coat to his lips several times. 
"i don't know this man!" said mr. jaggers, in the same devastating 
strain: "what does this fellow want?" 
"ma thear mithter jaggerth. hown brother to habraham latharuth?" 
"who's he?" said mr. jaggers. "let go of my coat." 
the suitor, kissing the hem of the garment again before 
relinquishing it, replied, "habraham latharuth, on thuthpithion of 
plate." 
"you're too late," said mr. jaggers. "i am over the way." 
"holy father, mithter jaggerth!" cried my excitable acquaintance, 
turning white, "don't thay you're again habraham latharuth!" 
"i am," said mr. jaggers, "and there's an end of it. get out of the 
way." 
"mithter jaggerth! half a moment! my hown cuthen'th gone to mithter 
wemmick at thith prethent minute, to hoffer him hany termth. 
mithter jaggerth! half a quarter of a moment! if you'd have the 
condethenthun to be bought off from the t'other thide - at hany 
thuperior prithe! - money no object! - mithter jaggerth - mithter - !" 
my guardian threw his supplicant off with supreme indifference, and 
left him dancing on the pavement as if it were red-hot. without 
further interruption, we reached the front office, where we found 
the clerk and the man in velveteen with the fur cap. 
"here's mike," said the clerk, getting down from his stool, and 
approaching mr. jaggers confidentially. 
"oh!" said mr. jaggers, turning to the man, who was pulling a lock 
of hair in the middle of his forehead, like the bull in cock robin 
pulling at the bell-rope; "your man comes on this afternoon. well?" 
"well, mas'r jaggers," returned mike, in the voice of a sufferer 
from a constitutional cold; "arter a deal o' trouble, i've found 
one, sir, as might do." 
"what is he prepared to swear?" 
"well, mas'r jaggers," said mike, wiping his nose on his fur cap 
this time; "in a general way, anythink." 
mr. jaggers suddenly became most irate. "now, i warned you before," 
said he, throwing his forefinger at the terrified client, "that if 
you ever presumed to talk in that way here, i'd make an example of 
you. you infernal scoundrel, how dare you tell me that?" 
the client looked scared, but bewildered too, as if he were 
unconscious what he had done. 
"spooney!" said the clerk, in a low voice, giving him a stir with 
his elbow. "soft head! need you say it face to face?" 
"now, i ask you, you blundering booby," said my guardian, very 
sternly, "once more and for the last time, what the man you have 
brought here is prepared to swear?" 
mike looked hard at my guardian, as if he were trying to learn a 
lesson from his face, and slowly replied, "ayther to character, or 
to having been in his company and never left him all the night in 
question." 
"now, be careful. in what station of life is this man?" 
mike looked at his cap, and looked at the floor, and looked at the 
ceiling, and looked at the clerk, and even looked at me, before 
beginning to reply in a nervous manner, "we've dressed him up 
like-" when my guardian blustered out: 
"what? you will, will you?" 
("spooney!" added the clerk again, with another stir.) 
after some helpless casting about, mike brightened and began again: 
"he is dressed like a 'spectable pieman. a sort of a pastry-cook." 
"is he here?" asked my guardian. 
"i left him," said mike, "a settin on some doorsteps round the 
corner." 
"take him past that window, and let me see him." 
the window indicated, was the office window. we all three went to 
it, behind the wire blind, and presently saw the client go by in an 
accidental manner, with a murderous-looking tall individual, in a 
short suit of white linen and a paper cap. this guileless 
confectioner was not by any means sober, and had a black eye in the 
green stage of recovery, which was painted over. 
"tell him to take his witness away directly," said my guardian to 
the clerk, in extreme disgust, "and ask him what he means by 
bringing such a fellow as that." 
my guardian then took me into his own room, and while he lunched, 
standing, from a sandwich-box and a pocket flask of sherry (he 
seemed to bully his very sandwich as he ate it), informed me what 
arrangements he had made for me. i was to go to "barnard's inn," to 
young mr. pocket's rooms, where a bed had been sent in for my 
accommodation; i was to remain with young mr. pocket until monday; 
on monday i was to go with him to his father's house on a visit, 
that i might try how i liked it. also, i was told what my allowance 
was to be - it was a very liberal one - and had handed to me from 
one of my guardian's drawers, the cards of certain tradesmen with 
whom i was to deal for all kinds of clothes, and such other things 
as i could in reason want. "you will find your credit good, mr. 
pip," said my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole 
cask-full, as he hastily refreshed himself, "but i shall by this 
means be able to check your bills, and to pull you up if i find you 
outrunning the constable. of course you'll go wrong somehow, but 
that's no fault of mine." 
after i had pondered a little over this encouraging sentiment, i 
asked mr. jaggers if i could send for a coach? he said it was not 
worth while, i was so near my destination; wemmick should walk 
round with me, if i pleased. 
i then found that wemmick was the clerk in the next room. another 
clerk was rung down from up-stairs to take his place while he was 
out, and i accompanied him into the street, after shaking hands 
with my guardian. we found a new set of people lingering outside, 
but wemmick made a way among them by saying coolly yet decisively, 
"i tell you it's no use; he won't have a word to say to one of 
you;" and we soon got clear of them, and went on side by side. 
chapter 21 
casting my eyes on mr. wemmick as we went along, to see what he was 
like in the light of day, i found him to be a dry man, rather short 
in stature, with a square wooden face, whose expression seemed to 
have been imperfectly chipped out with a dull-edged chisel. there 
were some marks in it that might have been dimples, if the material 
had been softer and the instrument finer, but which, as it was, 
were only dints. the chisel had made three or four of these 
attempts at embellishment over his nose, but had given them up 
without an effort to smooth them off. i judged him to be a bachelor 
from the frayed condition of his linen, and he appeared to have 
sustained a good many bereavements; for, he wore at least four 
mourning rings, besides a brooch representing a lady and a weeping 
willow at a tomb with an urn on it. i noticed, too, that several 
rings and seals hung at his watch chain, as if he were quite laden 
with remembrances of departed friends. he had glittering eyes - 
small, keen, and black - and thin wide mottled lips. he had had 
them, to the best of my belief, from forty to fifty years. 
"so you were never in london before?" said mr. wemmick to me. 
"no," said i. 
"i was new here once," said mr. wemmick. "rum to think of now!" 
"you are well acquainted with it now?" 
"why, yes," said mr. wemmick. "i know the moves of it." 
"is it a very wicked place?" i asked, more for the sake of saying 
something than for information. 
"you may get cheated, robbed, and murdered, in london. but there 
are plenty of people anywhere, who'll do that for you." 
"if there is bad blood between you and them," said i, to soften it 
off a little. 
"oh! i don't know about bad blood," returned mr. wemmick; "there's 
not much bad blood about. they'll do it, if there's anything to be 
got by it." 
"that makes it worse." 
"you think so?" returned mr. wemmick. "much about the same, i should 
say." 
he wore his hat on the back of his head, and looked straight before 
him: walking in a self-contained way as if there were nothing in 
the streets to claim his attention. his mouth was such a postoffice 
of a mouth that he had a mechanical appearance of smiling. we had 
got to the top of holborn hill before i knew that it was merely a 
mechanical appearance, and that he was not smiling at all. 
"do you know where mr. matthew pocket lives?" i asked mr. wemmick. 
"yes," said he, nodding in the direction. "at hammersmith, west of 
london." 
"is that far?" 
"well! say five miles." 
"do you know him?" 
"why, you're a regular cross-examiner!" said mr. wemmick, looking at 
me with an approving air. "yes, i know him. i know him!" 
there was an air of toleration or depreciation about his utterance 
of these words, that rather depressed me; and i was still looking 
sideways at his block of a face in search of any encouraging note 
to the text, when he said here we were at barnard's inn. my 
depression was not alleviated by the announcement, for, i had 
supposed that establishment to be an hotel kept by mr. barnard, to 
which the blue boar in our town was a mere public-house. whereas i 
now found barnard to be a disembodied spirit, or a fiction, and his 
inn the dingiest collection of shabby buildings ever squeezed 
together in a rank corner as a club for tom-cats. 
we entered this haven through a wicket-gate, and were disgorged by 
an introductory passage into a melancholy little square that looked 
to me like a flat burying-ground. i thought it had the most dismal 
trees in it, and the most dismal sparrows, and the most dismal 
cats, and the most dismal houses (in number half a dozen or so), 
that i had ever seen. i thought the windows of the sets of chambers 
into which those houses were divided, were in every stage of 
dilapidated blind and curtain, crippled flower-pot, cracked glass, 
dusty decay, and miserable makeshift; while to let to let to let, 
glared at me from empty rooms, as if no new wretches ever came 
there, and the vengeance of the soul of barnard were being slowly 
appeased by the gradual suicide of the present occupants and their 
unholy interment under the gravel. a frouzy mourning of soot and 
smoke attired this forlorn creation of barnard, and it had strewn 
ashes on its head, and was undergoing penance and humiliation as a 
mere dust-hole. thus far my sense of sight; while dry rot and wet 
rot and all the silent rots that rot in neglected roof and cellar - 
rot of rat and mouse and bug and coaching-stables near at hand 
besides - addressed themselves faintly to my sense of smell, and 
moaned, "try barnard's mixture." 
so imperfect was this realization of the first of my great 
expectations, that i looked in dismay at mr. wemmick. "ah!" said he, 
mistaking me; "the retirement reminds you of the country. so it 
does me." 
he led me into a corner and conducted me up a flight of stairs - 
which appeared to me to be slowly collapsing into sawdust, so that 
one of those days the upper lodgers would look out at their doors 
and find themselves without the means of coming down - to a set of 
chambers on the top floor. mr. pocket, jun., was painted on the 
door, and there was a label on the letter-box, "return shortly." 
"he hardly thought you'd come so soon," mr. wemmick explained. "you 
don't want me any more?" 
"no, thank you," said i. 
"as i keep the cash," mr. wemmick observed, "we shall most likely 
meet pretty often. good day." 
"good day." 
i put out my hand, and mr. wemmick at first looked at it as if he 
thought i wanted something. then he looked at me, and said, 
correcting himself, 
"to be sure! yes. you're in the habit of shaking hands?" 
i was rather confused, thinking it must be out of the london 
fashion, but said yes. 
"i have got so out of it!" said mr. wemmick - "except at last. very 
glad, i'm sure, to make your acquaintance. good day!" 
when we had shaken hands and he was gone, i opened the staircase 
window and had nearly beheaded myself, for, the lines had rotted 
away, and it came down like the guillotine. happily it was so quick 
that i had not put my head out. after this escape, i was content to 
take a foggy view of the inn through the window's encrusting dirt, 
and to stand dolefully looking out, saying to myself that london 
was decidedly overrated. 
mr. pocket, junior's, idea of shortly was not mine, for i had nearly 
maddened myself with looking out for half an hour, and had written 
my name with my finger several times in the dirt of every pane in 
the window, before i heard footsteps on the stairs. gradually there 
arose before me the hat, head, neckcloth, waistcoat, trousers, 
boots, of a member of society of about my own standing. he had a 
paper-bag under each arm and a pottle of strawberries in one hand, 
and was out of breath. 
"mr. pip?" said he. 
"mr. pocket?" said i. 
"dear me!" he exclaimed. "i am extremely sorry; but i knew there 
was a coach from your part of the country at midday, and i thought 
you would come by that one. the fact is, i have been out on your 
account - not that that is any excuse - for i thought, coming from 
the country, you might like a little fruit after dinner, and i went 
to covent garden market to get it good." 
for a reason that i had, i felt as if my eyes would start out of my 
head. i acknowledged his attention incoherently, and began to think 
this was a dream. 
"dear me!" said mr. pocket, junior. "this door sticks so!" 
as he was fast making jam of his fruit by wrestling with the door 
while the paper-bags were under his arms, i begged him to allow me 
to hold them. he relinquished them with an agreeable smile, and 
combated with the door as if it were a wild beast. it yielded so 
suddenly at last, that he staggered back upon me, and i staggered 
back upon the opposite door, and we both laughed. but still i felt 
as if my eyes must start out of my head, and as if this must be a 
dream. 
"pray come in," said mr. pocket, junior. "allow me to lead the way. 
i am rather bare here, but i hope you'll be able to make out 
tolerably well till monday. my father thought you would get on more 
agreeably through to-morrow with me than with him, and might like 
to take a walk about london. i am sure i shall be very happy to 
show london to you. as to our table, you won't find that bad, i 
hope, for it will be supplied from our coffee-house here, and (it 
is only right i should add) at your expense, such being mr. 
jaggers's directions. as to our lodging, it's not by any means 
splendid, because i have my own bread to earn, and my father hasn't 
anything to give me, and i shouldn't be willing to take it, if he 
had. this is our sitting-room - just such chairs and tables and 
carpet and so forth, you see, as they could spare from home. you 
mustn't give me credit for the tablecloth and spoons and castors, 
because they come for you from the coffee-house. this is my little 
bedroom; rather musty, but barnard's is musty. this is your 
bed-room; the furniture's hired for the occasion, but i trust it 
will answer the purpose; if you should want anything, i'll go and 
fetch it. the chambers are retired, and we shall be alone together, 
but we shan't fight, i dare say. but, dear me, i beg your pardon, 
you're holding the fruit all this time. pray let me take these bags 
from you. i am quite ashamed." 
as i stood opposite to mr. pocket, junior, delivering him the bags, 
one, two, i saw the starting appearance come into his own eyes that 
i knew to be in mine, and he said, falling back: 
"lord bless me, you're the prowling boy!" 
"and you," said i, "are the pale young gentleman!" 
chapter 22 
the pale young gentleman and i stood contemplating one another in 
barnard's inn, until we both burst out laughing. "the idea of its 
being you!" said he. "the idea of its being you!" said i. and then 
we contemplated one another afresh, and laughed again. "well!" said 
the pale young gentleman, reaching out his hand goodhumouredly, 
"it's all over now, i hope, and it will be magnanimous in you if 
you'll forgive me for having knocked you about so." 
i derived from this speech that mr. herbert pocket (for herbert was 
the pale young gentleman's name) still rather confounded his 
intention with his execution. but i made a modest reply, and we 
shook hands warmly. 
"you hadn't come into your good fortune at that time?" said herbert 
pocket. 
"no," said i. 
"no," he acquiesced: "i heard it had happened very lately. i was 
rather on the look-out for good-fortune then." 
"indeed?" 
"yes. miss havisham had sent for me, to see if she could take a 
fancy to me. but she couldn't - at all events, she didn't." 
i thought it polite to remark that i was surprised to hear that. 
"bad taste," said herbert, laughing, "but a fact. yes, she had sent 
for me on a trial visit, and if i had come out of it successfully, 
i suppose i should have been provided for; perhaps i should have 
been what-you-may-called it to estella." 
"what's that?" i asked, with sudden gravity. 
he was arranging his fruit in plates while we talked, which divided 
his attention, and was the cause of his having made this lapse of a 
word. "affianced," he explained, still busy with the fruit. 
"betrothed. engaged. what's-his-named. any word of that sort." 
"how did you bear your disappointment?" i asked. 
"pooh!" said he, "i didn't care much for it. she's a tartar." 
"miss havisham?" 
"i don't say no to that, but i meant estella. that girl's hard and 
haughty and capricious to the last degree, and has been brought up 
by miss havisham to wreak revenge on all the male sex." 
"what relation is she to miss havisham?" 
"none," said he. "only adopted." 
"why should she wreak revenge on all the male sex? what revenge?" 
"lord, mr. pip!" said he. "don't you know?" 
"no," said i. 
"dear me! it's quite a story, and shall be saved till dinner-time. 
and now let me take the liberty of asking you a question. how did 
you come there, that day?" 
i told him, and he was attentive until i had finished, and then 
burst out laughing again, and asked me if i was sore afterwards? i 
didn't ask him if he was, for my conviction on that point was 
perfectly established. 
"mr. jaggers is your guardian, i understand?" he went on. 
"yes." 
"you know he is miss havisham's man of business and solicitor, and 
has her confidence when nobody else has?" 
this was bringing me (i felt) towards dangerous ground. i answered 
with a constraint i made no attempt to disguise, that i had seen mr. 
jaggers in miss havisham's house on the very day of our combat, but 
never at any other time, and that i believed he had no recollection 
of having ever seen me there. 
"he was so obliging as to suggest my father for your tutor, and he 
called on my father to propose it. of course he knew about my 
father from his connexion with miss havisham. my father is miss 
havisham's cousin; not that that implies familiar intercourse 
between them, for he is a bad courtier and will not propitiate 
her." 
herbert pocket had a frank and easy way with him that was very 
taking. i had never seen any one then, and i have never seen any 
one since, who more strongly expressed to me, in every look and 
tone, a natural incapacity to do anything secret and mean. there 
was something wonderfully hopeful about his general air, and 
something that at the same time whispered to me he would never be 
very successful or rich. i don't know how this was. i became imbued 
with the notion on that first occasion before we sat down to 
dinner, but i cannot define by what means. 
he was still a pale young gentleman, and had a certain conquered 
languor about him in the midst of his spirits and briskness, that 
did not seem indicative of natural strength. he had not a handsome 
face, but it was better than handsome: being extremely amiable and 
cheerful. his figure was a little ungainly, as in the days when my 
knuckles had taken such liberties with it, but it looked as if it 
would always be light and young. whether mr. trabb's local work 
would have sat more gracefully on him than on me, may be a 
question; but i am conscious that he carried off his rather old 
clothes, much better than i carried off my new suit. 
as he was so communicative, i felt that reserve on my part would be 
a bad return unsuited to our years. i therefore told him my small 
story, and laid stress on my being forbidden to inquire who my 
benefactor was. i further mentioned that as i had been brought up a 
blacksmith in a country place, and knew very little of the ways of 
politeness, i would take it as a great kindness in him if he would 
give me a hint whenever he saw me at a loss or going wrong. 
"with pleasure," said he, "though i venture to prophesy that you'll 
want very few hints. i dare say we shall be often together, and i 
should like to banish any needless restraint between us. will you 
do me the favour to begin at once to call me by my christian name, 
herbert?" 
i thanked him, and said i would. i informed him in exchange that my 
christian name was philip. 
"i don't take to philip," said he, smiling, "for it sounds like a 
moral boy out of the spelling-book, who was so lazy that he fell 
into a pond, or so fat that he couldn't see out of his eyes, or so 
avaricious that he locked up his cake till the mice ate it, or so 
determined to go a bird's-nesting that he got himself eaten by 
bears who lived handy in the neighbourhood. i tell you what i 
should like. we are so harmonious, and you have been a blacksmith - 
would you mind it?" 
"i shouldn't mind anything that you propose," i answered, "but i 
don't understand you." 
"would you mind handel for a familiar name? there's a charming 
piece of music by handel, called the harmonious blacksmith." 
"i should like it very much." 
"then, my dear handel," said he, turning round as the door opened, 
"here is the dinner, and i must beg of you to take the top of the 
table, because the dinner is of your providing." 
this i would not hear of, so he took the top, and i faced him. it 
was a nice little dinner - seemed to me then, a very lord mayor's 
feast - and it acquired additional relish from being eaten under 
those independent circumstances, with no old people by, and with 
london all around us. this again was heightened by a certain gipsy 
character that set the banquet off; for, while the table was, as mr. 
pumblechook might have said, the lap of luxury - being entirely 
furnished forth from the coffee-house - the circumjacent region of 
sitting-room was of a comparatively pastureless and shifty 
character: imposing on the waiter the wandering habits of putting 
the covers on the floor (where he fell over them), the melted 
butter in the armchair, the bread on the bookshelves, the cheese in 
the coalscuttle, and the boiled fowl into my bed in the next room - 
where i found much of its parsley and butter in a state of 
congelation when i retired for the night. all this made the feast 
delightful, and when the waiter was not there to watch me, my 
pleasure was without alloy. 
we had made some progress in the dinner, when i reminded herbert of 
his promise to tell me about miss havisham. 
"true," he replied. "i'll redeem it at once. let me introduce the 
topic, handel, by mentioning that in london it is not the custom to 
put the knife in the mouth - for fear of accidents - and that while 
the fork is reserved for that use, it is not put further in than 
necessary. it is scarcely worth mentioning, only it's as well to do 
as other people do. also, the spoon is not generally used 
over-hand, but under. this has two advantages. you get at your 
mouth better (which after all is the object), and you save a good 
deal of the attitude of opening oysters, on the part of the right 
elbow." 
he offered these friendly suggestions in such a lively way, that we 
both laughed and i scarcely blushed. 
"now," he pursued, "concerning miss havisham. miss havisham, you 
must know, was a spoilt child. her mother died when she was a baby, 
and her father denied her nothing. her father was a country 
gentleman down in your part of the world, and was a brewer. i don't 
know why it should be a crack thing to be a brewer; but it is 
indisputable that while you cannot possibly be genteel and bake, 
you may be as genteel as never was and brew. you see it every day." 
"yet a gentleman may not keep a public-house; may he?" said i. 
"not on any account," returned herbert; "but a public-house may 
keep a gentleman. well! mr. havisham was very rich and very proud. 
so was his daughter." 
"miss havisham was an only child?" i hazarded. 
"stop a moment, i am coming to that. no, she was not an only child; 
she had a half-brother. her father privately married again - his 
cook, i rather think." 
"i thought he was proud," said i. 
"my good handel, so he was. he married his second wife privately, 
because he was proud, and in course of time she died. when she was 
dead, i apprehend he first told his daughter what he had done, and 
then the son became a part of the family, residing in the house you 
are acquainted with. as the son grew a young man, he turned out 
riotous, extravagant, undutiful - altogether bad. at last his 
father disinherited him; but he softened when he was dying, and 
left him well off, though not nearly so well off as miss havisham. 
take another glass of wine, and excuse my mentioning that society 
as a body does not expect one to be so strictly conscientious in 
emptying one's glass, as to turn it bottom upwards with the rim on 
one's nose." 
i had been doing this, in an excess of attention to his recital. i 
thanked him, and apologized. he said, "not at all," and resumed. 
"miss havisham was now an heiress, and you may suppose was looked 
after as a great match. her half-brother had now ample means again, 
but what with debts and what with new madness wasted them most 
fearfully again. there were stronger differences between him and 
her, than there had been between him and his father, and it is 
suspected that he cherished a deep and mortal grudge against her, 
as having influenced the father's anger. now, i come to the cruel 
part of the story - merely breaking off, my dear handel, to remark 
that a dinner-napkin will not go into a tumbler." 
why i was trying to pack mine into my tumbler, i am wholly unable 
to say. i only know that i found myself, with a perseverance worthy 
of a much better cause, making the most strenuous exertions to 
compress it within those limits. again i thanked him and 
apologized, and again he said in the cheerfullest manner, "not at 
all, i am sure!" and resumed. 
"there appeared upon the scene - say at the races, or the public 
balls, or anywhere else you like - a certain man, who made love to 
miss havisham. i never saw him, for this happened five-and-twenty 
years ago (before you and i were, handel), but i have heard my 
father mention that he was a showy-man, and the kind of man for the 
purpose. but that he was not to be, without ignorance or prejudice, 
mistaken for a gentleman, my father most strongly asseverates; 
because it is a principle of his that no man who was not a true 
gentleman at heart, ever was, since the world began, a true 
gentleman in manner. he says, no varnish can hide the grain of the 
wood; and that the more varnish you put on, the more the grain will 
express itself. well! this man pursued miss havisham closely, and 
professed to be devoted to her. i believe she had not shown much 
susceptibility up to that time; but all the susceptibility she 
possessed, certainly came out then, and she passionately loved him. 
there is no doubt that she perfectly idolized him. he practised on 
her affection in that systematic way, that he got great sums of 
money from her, and he induced her to buy her brother out of a 
share in the brewery (which had been weakly left him by his father) 
at an immense price, on the plea that when he was her husband he 
must hold and manage it all. your guardian was not at that time in 
miss havisham's councils, and she was too haughty and too much in 
love, to be advised by any one. her relations were poor and 
scheming, with the exception of my father; he was poor enough, but 
not time-serving or jealous. the only independent one among them, 
he warned her that she was doing too much for this man, and was 
placing herself too unreservedly in his power. she took the first 
opportunity of angrily ordering my father out of the house, in his 
presence, and my father has never seen her since." 
i thought of her having said, "matthew will come and see me at last 
when i am laid dead upon that table;" and i asked herbert whether 
his father was so inveterate against her? 
"it's not that," said he, "but she charged him, in the presence of 
her intended husband, with being disappointed in the hope of 
fawning upon her for his own advancement, and, if he were to go to 
her now, it would look true - even to him - and even to her. to 
return to the man and make an end of him. the marriage day was 
fixed, the wedding dresses were bought, the wedding tour was 
planned out, the wedding guests were invited. the day came, but not 
the bridegroom. he wrote her a letter-" 
"which she received," i struck in, "when she was dressing for her 
marriage? at twenty minutes to nine?" 
"at the hour and minute," said herbert, nodding, "at which she 
afterwards stopped all the clocks. what was in it, further than 
that it most heartlessly broke the marriage off, i can't tell you, 
because i don't know. when she recovered from a bad illness that 
she had, she laid the whole place waste, as you have seen it, and 
she has never since looked upon the light of day." 
"is that all the story?" i asked, after considering it. 
"all i know of it; and indeed i only know so much, through piecing 
it out for myself; for my father always avoids it, and, even when 
miss havisham invited me to go there, told me no more of it than it 
was absolutely requisite i should understand. but i have forgotten 
one thing. it has been supposed that the man to whom she gave her 
misplaced confidence, acted throughout in concert with her 
half-brother; that it was a conspiracy between them; and that they 
shared the profits." 
"i wonder he didn't marry her and get all the property," said i. 
"he may have been married already, and her cruel mortification may 
have been a part of her half-brother's scheme," said herbert. 
"mind! i don't know that." 
"what became of the two men?" i asked, after again considering the 
subject. 
"they fell into deeper shame and degradation - if there can be 
deeper - and ruin." 
"are they alive now?" 
"i don't know." 
"you said just now, that estella was not related to miss havisham, 
but adopted. when adopted?" 
herbert shrugged his shoulders. "there has always been an estella, 
since i have heard of a miss havisham. i know no more. and now, 
handel," said he, finally throwing off the story as it were, "there 
is a perfectly open understanding between us. all that i know about 
miss havisham, you know." 
"and all that i know," i retorted, "you know." 
"i fully believe it. so there can be no competition or perplexity 
between you and me. and as to the condition on which you hold your 
advancement in life - namely, that you are not to inquire or 
discuss to whom you owe it - you may be very sure that it will 
never be encroached upon, or even approached, by me, or by any one 
belonging to me." 
in truth, he said this with so much delicacy, that i felt the 
subject done with, even though i should be under his father's roof 
for years and years to come. yet he said it with so much meaning, 
too, that i felt he as perfectly understood miss havisham to be my 
benefactress, as i understood the fact myself. 
it had not occurred to me before, that he had led up to the theme 
for the purpose of clearing it out of our way; but we were so much 
the lighter and easier for having broached it, that i now perceived 
this to be the case. we were very gay and sociable, and i asked 
him, in the course of conversation, what he was? he replied, "a 
capitalist - an insurer of ships." i suppose he saw me glancing 
about the room in search of some tokens of shipping, or capital, 
for he added, "in the city." 
i had grand ideas of the wealth and importance of insurers of ships 
in the city, and i began to think with awe, of having laid a young 
insurer on his back, blackened his enterprising eye, and cut his 
responsible head open. but, again, there came upon me, for my 
relief, that odd impression that herbert pocket would never be very 
successful or rich. 
"i shall not rest satisfied with merely employing my capital in 
insuring ships. i shall buy up some good life assurance shares, and 
cut into the direction. i shall also do a little in the mining way. 
none of these things will interfere with my chartering a few 
thousand tons on my own account. i think i shall trade," said he, 
leaning back in his chair, "to the east indies, for silks, shawls, 
spices, dyes, drugs, and precious woods. it's an interesting 
trade." 
"and the profits are large?" said i. 
"tremendous!" said he. 
i wavered again, and began to think here were greater expectations 
than my own. 
"i think i shall trade, also," said he, putting his thumbs in his 
waistcoat pockets, "to the west indies, for sugar, tobacco, and 
rum. also to ceylon, specially for elephants' tusks." 
"you will want a good many ships," said i. 
"a perfect fleet," said he. 
quite overpowered by the magnificence of these transactions, i 
asked him where the ships he insured mostly traded to at present? 
"i haven't begun insuring yet," he replied. "i am looking about 
me." 
somehow, that pursuit seemed more in keeping with barnard's inn. i 
said (in a tone of conviction), "ah-h!" 
"yes. i am in a counting-house, and looking about me." 
"is a counting-house profitable?" i asked. 
"to - do you mean to the young fellow who's in it?" he asked, in 
reply. 
"yes; to you." 
"why, n-no: not to me." he said this with the air of one carefully 
reckoning up and striking a balance. "not directly profitable. that 
is, it doesn't pay me anything, and i have to - keep myself." 
this certainly had not a profitable appearance, and i shook my head 
as if i would imply that it would be difficult to lay by much 
accumulative capital from such a source of income. 
"but the thing is," said herbert pocket, "that you look about you. 
that's the grand thing. you are in a counting-house, you know, and 
you look about you." 
it struck me as a singular implication that you couldn't be out of 
a counting-house, you know, and look about you; but i silently 
deferred to his experience. 
"then the time comes," said herbert, "when you see your opening. 
and you go in, and you swoop upon it and you make your capital, and 
then there you are! when you have once made your capital, you have 
nothing to do but employ it." 
this was very like his way of conducting that encounter in the 
garden; very like. his manner of bearing his poverty, too, exactly 
corresponded to his manner of bearing that defeat. it seemed to me 
that he took all blows and buffets now, with just the same air as 
he had taken mine then. it was evident that he had nothing around 
him but the simplest necessaries, for everything that i remarked 
upon turned out to have been sent in on my account from the 
coffee-house or somewhere else. 
yet, having already made his fortune in his own mind, he was so 
unassuming with it that i felt quite grateful to him for not being 
puffed up. it was a pleasant addition to his naturally pleasant 
ways, and we got on famously. in the evening we went out for a walk 
in the streets, and went half-price to the theatre; and next day we 
went to church at westminster abbey, and in the afternoon we walked 
in the parks; and i wondered who shod all the horses there, and 
wished joe did. 
on a moderate computation, it was many months, that sunday, since i 
had left joe and biddy. the space interposed between myself and 
them, partook of that expansion, and our marshes were any distance 
off. that i could have been at our old church in my old 
church-going clothes, on the very last sunday that ever was, seemed 
a combination of impossibilities, geographical and social, solar 
and lunar. yet in the london streets, so crowded with people and so 
brilliantly lighted in the dusk of evening, there were depressing 
hints of reproaches for that i had put the poor old kitchen at home 
so far away; and in the dead of night, the footsteps of some 
incapable impostor of a porter mooning about barnard's inn, under 
pretence of watching it, fell hollow on my heart. 
on the monday morning at a quarter before nine, herbert went to the 
counting-house to report himself - to look about him, too, i 
suppose - and i bore him company. he was to come away in an hour or 
two to attend me to hammersmith, and i was to wait about for him. 
it appeared to me that the eggs from which young insurers were 
hatched, were incubated in dust and heat, like the eggs of 
ostriches, judging from the places to which those incipient giants 
repaired on a monday morning. nor did the counting-house where 
herbert assisted, show in my eyes as at all a good observatory; 
being a back second floor up a yard, of a grimy presence in all 
particulars, and with a look into another back second floor, rather 
than a look out. 
i waited about until it was noon, and i went upon 'change, and i 
saw fluey men sitting there under the bills about shipping, whom i 
took to be great merchants, though i couldn't understand why they 
should all be out of spirits. when herbert came, we went and had 
lunch at a celebrated house which i then quite venerated, but now 
believe to have been the most abject superstition in europe, and 
where i could not help noticing, even then, that there was much 
more gravy on the tablecloths and knives and waiters' clothes, than 
in the steaks. this collation disposed of at a moderate price 
(considering the grease: which was not charged for), we went back 
to barnard's inn and got my little portmanteau, and then took coach 
for hammersmith. we arrived there at two or three o'clock in the 
afternoon, and had very little way to walk to mr. pocket's house. 
lifting the latch of a gate, we passed direct into a little garden 
overlooking the river, where mr. pocket's children were playing 
about. and unless i deceive myself on a point where my interests or 
prepossessions are certainly not concerned, i saw that mr. and mrs. 
pocket's children were not growing up or being brought up, but were 
tumbling up. 
mrs. pocket was sitting on a garden chair under a tree, reading, 
with her legs upon another garden chair; and mrs. pocket's two 
nursemaids were looking about them while the children played. 
"mamma," said herbert, "this is young mr. pip." upon which mrs. 
pocket received me with an appearance of amiable dignity. 
"master alick and miss jane," cried one of the nurses to two of the 
children, "if you go a-bouncing up against them bushes you'll fall 
over into the river and be drownded, and what'll your pa say then?" 
at the same time this nurse picked up mrs. pocket's handkerchief, 
and said, "if that don't make six times you've dropped it, mum!" 
upon which mrs. pocket laughed and said, "thank you, flopson," and 
settling herself in one chair only, resumed her book. her 
countenance immediately assumed a knitted and intent expression as 
if she had been reading for a week, but before she could have read 
half a dozen lines, she fixed her eyes upon me, and said, "i hope 
your mamma is quite well?" this unexpected inquiry put me into such 
a difficulty that i began saying in the absurdest way that if there 
had been any such person i had no doubt she would have been quite 
well and would have been very much obliged and would have sent her 
compliments, when the nurse came to my rescue. 
"well!" she cried, picking up the pocket handkerchief, "if that 
don't make seven times! what are you a-doing of this afternoon, 
mum!" mrs. pocket received her property, at first with a look of 
unutterable surprise as if she had never seen it before, and then 
with a laugh of recognition, and said, "thank you, flopson," and 
forgot me, and went on reading. 
i found, now i had leisure to count them, that there were no fewer 
than six little pockets present, in various stages of tumbling up. 
i had scarcely arrived at the total when a seventh was heard, as in 
the region of air, wailing dolefully. 
"if there ain't baby!" said flopson, appearing to think it most 
surprising. "make haste up, millers." 
millers, who was the other nurse, retired into the house, and by 
degrees the child's wailing was hushed and stopped, as if it were a 
young ventriloquist with something in its mouth. mrs. pocket read 
all the time, and i was curious to know what the book could be. 
we were waiting, i supposed, for mr. pocket to come out to us; at 
any rate we waited there, and so i had an opportunity of observing 
the remarkable family phenomenon that whenever any of the children 
strayed near mrs. pocket in their play, they always tripped 
themselves up and tumbled over her - always very much to her 
momentary astonishment, and their own more enduring lamentation. i 
was at a loss to account for this surprising circumstance, and 
could not help giving my mind to speculations about it, until 
by-and-by millers came down with the baby, which baby was handed to 
flopson, which flopson was handing it to mrs. pocket, when she too 
went fairly head foremost over mrs. pocket, baby and all, and was 
caught by herbert and myself. 
"gracious me, flopson!" said mrs. pocket, looking off her book for a 
moment, "everybody's tumbling!" 
"gracious you, indeed, mum!" returned flopson, very red in the 
face; "what have you got there?" 
"i got here, flopson?" asked mrs. pocket. 
"why, if it ain't your footstool!" cried flopson. "and if you keep 
it under your skirts like that, who's to help tumbling? here! take 
the baby, mum, and give me your book." 
mrs. pocket acted on the advice, and inexpertly danced the infant a 
little in her lap, while the other children played about it. this 
had lasted but a very short time, when mrs. pocket issued summary 
orders that they were all to be taken into the house for a nap. 
thus i made the second discovery on that first occasion, that the 
nurture of the little pockets consisted of alternately tumbling up 
and lying down. 
under these circumstances, when flopson and millers had got the 
children into the house, like a little flock of sheep, and mr. 
pocket came out of it to make my acquaintance, i was not much 
surprised to find that mr. pocket was a gentleman with a rather 
perplexed expression of face, and with his very grey hair 
disordered on his head, as if he didn't quite see his way to 
putting anything straight. 
chapter 23 
mr. pocket said he was glad to see me, and he hoped i was not sorry 
to see him. "for, i really am not," he added, with his son's smile, 
"an alarming personage." he was a young-looking man, in spite of 
his perplexities and his very grey hair, and his manner seemed 
quite natural. i use the word natural, in the sense of its being 
unaffected; there was something comic in his distraught way, as 
though it would have been downright ludicrous but for his own 
perception that it was very near being so. when he had talked with 
me a little, he said to mrs. pocket, with a rather anxious 
contraction of his eyebrows, which were black and handsome, 
"belinda, i hope you have welcomed mr. pip?" and she looked up from 
her book, and said, "yes." she then smiled upon me in an absent 
state of mind, and asked me if i liked the taste of orange-flower 
water? as the question had no bearing, near or remote, on any 
foregone or subsequent transaction, i consider it to have been 
thrown out, like her previous approaches, in general conversational 
condescension. 
i found out within a few hours, and may mention at once, that mrs. 
pocket was the only daughter of a certain quite accidental deceased 
knight, who had invented for himself a conviction that his deceased 
father would have been made a baronet but for somebody's determined 
opposition arising out of entirely personal motives - i forget 
whose, if i ever knew - the sovereign's, the prime minister's, the 
lord chancellor's, the archbishop of canterbury's, anybody's - and 
had tacked himself on to the nobles of the earth in right of this 
quite supposititious fact. i believe he had been knighted himself 
for storming the english grammar at the point of the pen, in a 
desperate address engrossed on vellum, on the occasion of the 
laying of the first stone of some building or other, and for 
handing some royal personage either the trowel or the mortar. be 
that as it may, he had directed mrs. pocket to be brought up from 
her cradle as one who in the nature of things must marry a title, 
and who was to be guarded from the acquisition of plebeian domestic 
knowledge. 
so successful a watch and ward had been established over the young 
lady by this judicious parent, that she had grown up highly 
ornamental, but perfectly helpless and useless. with her character 
thus happily formed, in the first bloom of her youth she had 
encountered mr. pocket: who was also in the first bloom of youth, 
and not quite decided whether to mount to the woolsack, or to roof 
himself in with a mitre. as his doing the one or the other was a 
mere question of time, he and mrs. pocket had taken time by the 
forelock (when, to judge from its length, it would seem to have 
wanted cutting), and had married without the knowledge of the 
judicious parent. the judicious parent, having nothing to bestow or 
withhold but his blessing, had handsomely settled that dower upon 
them after a short struggle, and had informed mr. pocket that his 
wife was "a treasure for a prince." mr. pocket had invested the 
prince's treasure in the ways of the world ever since, and it was 
supposed to have brought him in but indifferent interest. still, 
mrs. pocket was in general the object of a queer sort of respectful 
pity, because she had not married a title; while mr. pocket was the 
object of a queer sort of forgiving reproach, because he had never 
got one. 
mr. pocket took me into the house and showed me my room: which was a 
pleasant one, and so furnished as that i could use it with comfort 
for my own private sitting-room. he then knocked at the doors of 
two other similar rooms, and introduced me to their occupants, by 
name drummle and startop. drummle, an old-looking young man of a 
heavy order of architecture, was whistling. startop, younger in 
years and appearance, was reading and holding his head, as if he 
thought himself in danger of exploding it with too strong a charge 
of knowledge. 
both mr. and mrs. pocket had such a noticeable air of being in 
somebody else's hands, that i wondered who really was in possession 
of the house and let them live there, until i found this unknown 
power to be the servants. it was a smooth way of going on, perhaps, 
in respect of saving trouble; but it had the appearance of being 
expensive, for the servants felt it a duty they owed to themselves 
to be nice in their eating and drinking, and to keep a deal of 
company down stairs. they allowed a very liberal table to mr. and 
mrs. pocket, yet it always appeared to me that by far the best part 
of the house to have boarded in, would have been the kitchen - 
always supposing the boarder capable of self-defence, for, before i 
had been there a week, a neighbouring lady with whom the family 
were personally unacquainted, wrote in to say that she had seen 
millers slapping the baby. this greatly distressed mrs. pocket, who 
burst into tears on receiving the note, and said that it was an 
extraordinary thing that the neighbours couldn't mind their own 
business. 
by degrees i learnt, and chiefly from herbert, that mr. pocket had 
been educated at harrow and at cambridge, where he had 
distinguished himself; but that when he had had the happiness of 
marrying mrs. pocket very early in life, he had impaired his 
prospects and taken up the calling of a grinder. after grinding a 
number of dull blades - of whom it was remarkable that their 
fathers, when influential, were always going to help him to 
preferment, but always forgot to do it when the blades had left the 
grindstone - he had wearied of that poor work and had come to 
london. here, after gradually failing in loftier hopes, he had 
"read" with divers who had lacked opportunities or neglected them, 
and had refurbished divers others for special occasions, and had 
turned his acquirements to the account of literary compilation and 
correction, and on such means, added to some very moderate private 
resources, still maintained the house i saw. 
mr. and mrs. pocket had a toady neighbour; a widow lady of that 
highly sympathetic nature that she agreed with everybody, blessed 
everybody, and shed smiles and tears on everybody, according to 
circumstances. this lady's name was mrs. coiler, and i had the 
honour of taking her down to dinner on the day of my installation. 
she gave me to understand on the stairs, that it was a blow to dear 
mrs. pocket that dear mr. pocket should be under the necessity of 
receiving gentlemen to read with him. that did not extend to me, 
she told me in a gush of love and confidence (at that time, i had 
known her something less than five minutes); if they were all like 
me, it would be quite another thing. 
"but dear mrs. pocket," said mrs. coiler, "after her early 
disappointment (not that dear mr. pocket was to blame in that), 
requires so much luxury and elegance-" 
"yes, ma'am," i said, to stop her, for i was afraid she was going 
to cry. 
"and she is of so aristocratic a disposition-" 
"yes, ma'am," i said again, with the same object as before. 
" - that it is hard," said mrs. coiler, "to have dear mr. pocket's 
time and attention diverted from dear mrs. pocket." 
i could not help thinking that it might be harder if the butcher's 
time and attention were diverted from dear mrs. pocket; but i said 
nothing, and indeed had enough to do in keeping a bashful watch 
upon my company-manners. 
it came to my knowledge, through what passed between mrs. pocket and 
drummle while i was attentive to my knife and fork, spoon, glasses, 
and other instruments of self-destruction, that drummle, whose 
christian name was bentley, was actually the next heir but one to a 
baronetcy. it further appeared that the book i had seen mrs. pocket 
reading in the garden, was all about titles, and that she knew the 
exact date at which her grandpapa would have come into the book, if 
he ever had come at all. drummle didn't say much, but in his 
limited way (he struck me as a sulky kind of fellow) he spoke as 
one of the elect, and recognized mrs. pocket as a woman and a 
sister. no one but themselves and mrs. coiler the toady neighbour 
showed any interest in this part of the conversation, and it 
appeared to me that it was painful to herbert; but it promised to 
last a long time, when the page came in with the announcement of a 
domestic affliction. it was, in effect, that the cook had mislaid 
the beef. to my unutterable amazement, i now, for the first time, 
saw mr. pocket relieve his mind by going through a performance that 
struck me as very extraordinary, but which made no impression on 
anybody else, and with which i soon became as familiar as the rest. 
he laid down the carving-knife and fork - being engaged in carving, 
at the moment - put his two hands into his disturbed hair, and 
appeared to make an extraordinary effort to lift himself up by it. 
when he had done this, and had not lifted himself up at all, he 
quietly went on with what he was about. 
mrs. coiler then changed the subject, and began to flatter me. i 
liked it for a few moments, but she flattered me so very grossly 
that the pleasure was soon over. she had a serpentine way of coming 
close at me when she pretended to be vitally interested in the 
friends and localities i had left, which was altogether snaky and 
fork-tongued; and when she made an occasional bounce upon startop 
(who said very little to her), or upon drummle (who said less), i 
rather envied them for being on the opposite side of the table. 
after dinner the children were introduced, and mrs. coiler made 
admiring comments on their eyes, noses, and legs - a sagacious way 
of improving their minds. there were four little girls, and two 
little boys, besides the baby who might have been either, and the 
baby's next successor who was as yet neither. they were brought in 
by flopson and millers, much as though those two noncommissioned 
officers had been recruiting somewhere for children and had 
enlisted these: while mrs. pocket looked at the young nobles that 
ought to have been, as if she rather thought she had had the 
pleasure of inspecting them before, but didn't quite know what to 
make of them. 
"here! give me your fork, mum, and take the baby," said flopson. 
"don't take it that way, or you'll get its head under the table." 
thus advised, mrs. pocket took it the other way, and got its head 
upon the table; which was announced to all present by a prodigious 
concussion. 
"dear, dear! give it me back, mum," said flopson; "and miss jane, 
come and dance to baby, do!" 
one of the little girls, a mere mite who seemed to have prematurely 
taken upon herself some charge of the others, stepped out of her 
place by me, and danced to and from the baby until it left off 
crying, and laughed. then, all the children laughed, and mr. pocket 
(who in the meantime had twice endeavoured to lift himself up by 
the hair) laughed, and we all laughed and were glad. 
flopson, by dint of doubling the baby at the joints like a dutch 
doll, then got it safely into mrs. pocket's lap, and gave it the 
nutcrackers to play with: at the same time recommending mrs. pocket 
to take notice that the handles of that instrument were not likely 
to agree with its eyes, and sharply charging miss jane to look 
after the same. then, the two nurses left the room, and had a 
lively scuffle on the staircase with a dissipated page who had 
waited at dinner, and who had clearly lost half his buttons at the 
gamingtable. 
i was made very uneasy in my mind by mrs. pocket's falling into a 
discussion with drummle respecting two baronetcies, while she ate a 
sliced orange steeped in sugar and wine, and forgetting all about 
the baby on her lap: who did most appalling things with the 
nutcrackers. at length, little jane perceiving its young brains to 
be imperilled, softly left her place, and with many small artifices 
coaxed the dangerous weapon away. mrs. pocket finishing her orange 
at about the same time, and not approving of this, said to jane: 
"you naughty child, how dare you? go and sit down this instant!" 
"mamma dear," lisped the little girl, "baby ood have put hith eyeth 
out." 
"how dare you tell me so?" retorted mrs. pocket. "go and sit down in 
your chair this moment!" 
mrs. pocket's dignity was so crushing, that i felt quite abashed: as 
if i myself had done something to rouse it. 
"belinda," remonstrated mr. pocket, from the other end of the table, 
"how can you be so unreasonable? jane only interfered for the 
protection of baby." 
"i will not allow anybody to interfere," said mrs. pocket. "i am 
surprised, matthew, that you should expose me to the affront of 
interference." 
"good god!" cried mr. pocket, in an outbreak of desolate 
desperation. "are infants to be nutcrackered into their tombs, and 
is nobody to save them?" 
"i will not be interfered with by jane," said mrs. pocket, with a 
majestic glance at that innocent little offender. "i hope i know my 
poor grandpapa's position. jane, indeed!" 
mr. pocket got his hands in his hair again, and this time really did 
lift himself some inches out of his chair. "hear this!" he 
helplessly exclaimed to the elements. "babies are to be 
nutcrackered dead, for people's poor grandpapa's positions!" then 
he let himself down again, and became silent. 
we all looked awkwardly at the table-cloth while this was going on. 
a pause succeeded, during which the honest and irrepressible baby 
made a series of leaps and crows at little jane, who appeared to me 
to be the only member of the family (irrespective of servants) with 
whom it had any decided acquaintance. 
"mr. drummle," said mrs. pocket, "will you ring for flopson? jane, 
you undutiful little thing, go and lie down. now, baby darling, 
come with ma!" 
the baby was the soul of honour, and protested with all its might. 
it doubled itself up the wrong way over mrs. pocket's arm, exhibited 
a pair of knitted shoes and dimpled ankles to the company in lieu 
of its soft face, and was carried out in the highest state of 
mutiny. and it gained its point after all, for i saw it through the 
window within a few minutes, being nursed by little jane. 
it happened that the other five children were left behind at the 
dinner-table, through flopson's having some private engagement, and 
their not being anybody else's business. i thus became aware of the 
mutual relations between them and mr. pocket, which were exemplified 
in the following manner. mr. pocket, with the normal perplexity of 
his face heightened and his hair rumpled, looked at them for some 
minutes, as if he couldn't make out how they came to be boarding 
and lodging in that establishment, and why they hadn't been 
billeted by nature on somebody else. then, in a distant, missionary 
way he asked them certain questions - as why little joe had that 
hole in his frill: who said, pa, flopson was going to mend it when 
she had time - and how little fanny came by that whitlow: who said, 
pa, millers was going to poultice it when she didn't forget. then, 
he melted into parental tenderness, and gave them a shilling apiece 
and told them to go and play; and then as they went out, with one 
very strong effort to lift himself up by the hair he dismissed the 
hopeless subject. 
in the evening there was rowing on the river. as drummle and 
startop had each a boat, i resolved to set up mine, and to cut them 
both out. i was pretty good at most exercises in which countryboys 
are adepts, but, as i was conscious of wanting elegance of style 
for the thames - not to say for other waters - i at once engaged to 
place myself under the tuition of the winner of a prizewherry who 
plied at our stairs, and to whom i was introduced by my new allies. 
this practical authority confused me very much, by saying i had the 
arm of a blacksmith. if he could have known how nearly the 
compliment lost him his pupil, i doubt if he would have paid it. 
there was a supper-tray after we got home at night, and i think we 
should all have enjoyed ourselves, but for a rather disagreeable 
domestic occurrence. mr. pocket was in good spirits, when a 
housemaid came in, and said, "if you please, sir, i should wish to 
speak to you." 
"speak to your master?" said mrs. pocket, whose dignity was roused 
again. "how can you think of such a thing? go and speak to flopson. 
or speak to me - at some other time." 
"begging your pardon, ma'am," returned the housemaid, "i should 
wish to speak at once, and to speak to master." 
hereupon, mr. pocket went out of the room, and we made the best of 
ourselves until he came back. 
"this is a pretty thing, belinda!" said mr. pocket, returning with a 
countenance expressive of grief and despair. "here's the cook lying 
insensibly drunk on the kitchen floor, with a large bundle of fresh 
butter made up in the cupboard ready to sell for grease!" 
mrs. pocket instantly showed much amiable emotion, and said, "this 
is that odious sophia's doing!" 
"what do you mean, belinda?" demanded mr. pocket. 
"sophia has told you," said mrs. pocket. "did i not see her with my 
own eyes and hear her with my own ears, come into the room just now 
and ask to speak to you?" 
"but has she not taken me down stairs, belinda," returned mr. 
pocket, "and shown me the woman, and the bundle too?" 
"and do you defend her, matthew," said mrs. pocket, "for making 
mischief?" 
mr. pocket uttered a dismal groan. 
"am i, grandpapa's granddaughter, to be nothing in the house?" said 
mrs. pocket. "besides, the cook has always been a very nice 
respectful woman, and said in the most natural manner when she came 
to look after the situation, that she felt i was born to be a 
duchess." 
there was a sofa where mr. pocket stood, and he dropped upon it in 
the attitude of the dying gladiator. still in that attitude he 
said, with a hollow voice, "good night, mr. pip," when i deemed it 
advisable to go to bed and leave him. 
chapter 24 
after two or three days, when i had established myself in my room 
and had gone backwards and forwards to london several times, and 
had ordered all i wanted of my tradesmen, mr. pocket and i had a 
long talk together. he knew more of my intended career than i knew 
myself, for he referred to his having been told by mr. jaggers that 
i was not designed for any profession, and that i should be well 
enough educated for my destiny if i could "hold my own" with the 
average of young men in prosperous circumstances. i acquiesced, of 
course, knowing nothing to the contrary. 
he advised my attending certain places in london, for the 
acquisition of such mere rudiments as i wanted, and my investing 
him with the functions of explainer and director of all my studies. 
he hoped that with intelligent assistance i should meet with little 
to discourage me, and should soon be able to dispense with any aid 
but his. through his way of saying this, and much more to similar 
purpose, he placed himself on confidential terms with me in an 
admirable manner; and i may state at once that he was always so 
zealous and honourable in fulfilling his compact with me, that he 
made me zealous and honourable in fulfilling mine with him. if he 
had shown indifference as a master, i have no doubt i should have 
returned the compliment as a pupil; he gave me no such excuse, and 
each of us did the other justice. nor, did i ever regard him as 
having anything ludicrous about him - or anything but what was 
serious, honest, and good - in his tutor communication with me. 
when these points were settled, and so far carried out as that i 
had begun to work in earnest, it occurred to me that if i could 
retain my bedroom in barnard's inn, my life would be agreeably 
varied, while my manners would be none the worse for herbert's 
society. mr. pocket did not object to this arrangement, but urged 
that before any step could possibly be taken in it, it must be 
submitted to my guardian. i felt that this delicacy arose out of 
the consideration that the plan would save herbert some expense, so 
i went off to little britain and imparted my wish to mr. jaggers. 
"if i could buy the furniture now hired for me," said i, "and one 
or two other little things, i should be quite at home there." 
"go it!" said mr. jaggers, with a short laugh. "i told you you'd get 
on. well! how much do you want?" 
i said i didn't know how much. 
"come!" retorted mr. jaggers. "how much? fifty pounds?" 
"oh, not nearly so much." 
"five pounds?" said mr. jaggers. 
this was such a great fall, that i said in discomfiture, "oh! more 
than that." 
"more than that, eh!" retorted mr. jaggers, lying in wait for me, 
with his hands in his pockets, his head on one side, and his eyes 
on the wall behind me; "how much more?" 
"it is so difficult to fix a sum," said i, hesitating. 
"come!" said mr. jaggers. "let's get at it. twice five; will that 
do? three times five; will that do? four times five; will that do?" 
i said i thought that would do handsomely. 
"four times five will do handsomely, will it?" said mr. jaggers, 
knitting his brows. "now, what do you make of four times five?" 
"what do i make of it?" 
"ah!" said mr. jaggers; "how much?" 
"i suppose you make it twenty pounds," said i, smiling. 
"never mind what i make it, my friend," observed mr. jaggers, with a 
knowing and contradictory toss of his head. "i want to know what 
you make it." 
"twenty pounds, of course." 
"wemmick!" said mr. jaggers, opening his office door. "take mr. pip's 
written order, and pay him twenty pounds." 
this strongly marked way of doing business made a strongly marked 
impression on me, and that not of an agreeable kind. mr. jaggers 
never laughed; but he wore great bright creaking boots, and, in 
poising himself on these boots, with his large head bent down and 
his eyebrows joined together, awaiting an answer, he sometimes 
caused the boots to creak, as if they laughed in a dry and 
suspicious way. as he happened to go out now, and as wemmick was 
brisk and talkative, i said to wemmick that i hardly knew what to 
make of mr. jaggers's manner. 
"tell him that, and he'll take it as a compliment," answered 
wemmick; "he don't mean that you should know what to make of it. - 
oh!" for i looked surprised, "it's not personal; it's professional: 
only professional." 
wemmick was at his desk, lunching - and crunching - on a dry hard 
biscuit; pieces of which he threw from time to time into his slit 
of a mouth, as if he were posting them. 
"always seems to me," said wemmick, "as if he had set a mantrap and 
was watching it. suddenly - click - you're caught!" 
without remarking that mantraps were not among the amenities of 
life, i said i supposed he was very skilful? 
"deep," said wemmick, "as australia." pointing with his pen at the 
office floor, to express that australia was understood, for the 
purposes of the figure, to be symmetrically on the opposite spot of 
the globe. "if there was anything deeper," added wemmick, bringing 
his pen to paper, "he'd be it." 
then, i said i supposed he had a fine business, and wemmick said, 
"ca-pi-tal!" then i asked if there were many clerks? to which he 
replied: 
"we don't run much into clerks, because there's only one jaggers, 
and people won't have him at second-hand. there are only four of 
us. would you like to see 'em? you are one of us, as i may say." 
i accepted the offer. when mr. wemmick had put all the biscuit into 
the post, and had paid me my money from a cash-box in a safe, the 
key of which safe he kept somewhere down his back and produced from 
his coat-collar like an iron pigtail, we went up-stairs. the house 
was dark and shabby, and the greasy shoulders that had left their 
mark in mr. jaggers's room, seemed to have been shuffling up and 
down the staircase for years. in the front first floor, a clerk who 
looked something between a publican and a rat-catcher - a large 
pale puffed swollen man - was attentively engaged with three or 
four people of shabby appearance, whom he treated as 
unceremoniously as everybody seemed to be treated who contributed 
to mr. jaggers's coffers. "getting evidence together," said mr. 
wemmick, as we came out, "for the bailey." 
in the room over that, a little flabby terrier of a clerk with 
dangling hair (his cropping seemed to have been forgotten when he 
was a puppy) was similarly engaged with a man with weak eyes, whom 
mr. wemmick presented to me as a smelter who kept his pot always 
boiling, and who would melt me anything i pleased - and who was in 
an excessive white-perspiration, as if he had been trying his art on 
himself. in a back room, a high-shouldered man with a face-ache tied 
up in dirty flannel, who was dressed in old black clothes that bore 
the appearance of having been waxed, was stooping over his work of 
making fair copies of the notes of the other two gentlemen, for mr. 
jaggers's own use. 
this was all the establishment. when we went down-stairs again, 
wemmick led me into my guardian's room, and said, "this you've seen 
already." 
"pray," said i, as the two odious casts with the twitchy leer upon 
them caught my sight again, "whose likenesses are those?" 
"these?" said wemmick, getting upon a chair, and blowing the dust 
off the horrible heads before bringing them down. "these are two 
celebrated ones. famous clients of ours that got us a world of 
credit. this chap (why you must have come down in the night and 
been peeping into the inkstand, to get this blot upon your eyebrow, 
you old rascal!) murdered his master, and, considering that he 
wasn't brought up to evidence, didn't plan it badly." 
"is it like him?" i asked, recoiling from the brute, as wemmick 
spat upon his eyebrow and gave it a rub with his sleeve. 
"like him? it's himself, you know. the cast was made in newgate, 
directly after he was taken down. you had a particular fancy for 
me, hadn't you, old artful?" said wemmick. he then explained this 
affectionate apostrophe, by touching his brooch representing the 
lady and the weeping willow at the tomb with the urn upon it, and 
saying, "had it made for me, express!" 
"is the lady anybody?" said i. 
"no," returned wemmick. "only his game. (you liked your bit of 
game, didn't you?) no; deuce a bit of a lady in the case, mr. pip, 
except one - and she wasn't of this slender ladylike sort, and you 
wouldn't have caught her looking after this urn - unless there was 
something to drink in it." wemmick's attention being thus directed 
to his brooch, he put down the cast, and polished the brooch with 
his pocket-handkerchief. 
"did that other creature come to the same end?" i asked. "he has 
the same look." 
"you're right," said wemmick; "it's the genuine look. much as if 
one nostril was caught up with a horsehair and a little fish-hook. 
yes, he came to the same end; quite the natural end here, i assure 
you. he forged wills, this blade did, if he didn't also put the 
supposed testators to sleep too. you were a gentlemanly cove, 
though" (mr. wemmick was again apostrophizing), "and you said you 
could write greek. yah, bounceable! what a liar you were! i never 
met such a liar as you!" before putting his late friend on his 
shelf again, wemmick touched the largest of his mourning rings and 
said, "sent out to buy it for me, only the day before." 
while he was putting up the other cast and coming down from the 
chair, the thought crossed my mind that all his personal jewellery 
was derived from like sources. as he had shown no diffidence on the 
subject, i ventured on the liberty of asking him the question, when 
he stood before me, dusting his hands. 
"oh yes," he returned, "these are all gifts of that kind. one 
brings another, you see; that's the way of it. i always take 'em. 
they're curiosities. and they're property. they may not be worth 
much, but, after all, they're property and portable. it don't 
signify to you with your brilliant look-out, but as to myself, my 
guidingstar always is, "get hold of portable property"." 
when i had rendered homage to this light, he went on to say, in a 
friendly manner: 
"if at any odd time when you have nothing better to do, you 
wouldn't mind coming over to see me at walworth, i could offer you 
a bed, and i should consider it an honour. i have not much to show 
you; but such two or three curiosities as i have got, you might 
like to look over; and i am fond of a bit of garden and a 
summer-house." 
i said i should be delighted to accept his hospitality. 
"thankee," said he; "then we'll consider that it's to come off, 
when convenient to you. have you dined with mr. jaggers yet?" 
"not yet." 
"well," said wemmick, "he'll give you wine, and good wine. i'll 
give you punch, and not bad punch. and now i'll tell you something. 
when you go to dine with mr. jaggers, look at his housekeeper." 
"shall i see something very uncommon?" 
"well," said wemmick, "you'll see a wild beast tamed. not so very 
uncommon, you'll tell me. i reply, that depends on the original 
wildness of the beast, and the amount of taming. it won't lower 
your opinion of mr. jaggers's powers. keep your eye on it." 
i told him i would do so, with all the interest and curiosity that 
his preparation awakened. as i was taking my departure, he asked me 
if i would like to devote five minutes to seeing mr. jaggers "at 
it?" 
for several reasons, and not least because i didn't clearly know 
what mr. jaggers would be found to be "at," i replied in the 
affirmative. we dived into the city, and came up in a crowded 
policecourt, where a blood-relation (in the murderous sense) of the 
deceased with the fanciful taste in brooches, was standing at the 
bar, uncomfortably chewing something; while my guardian had a woman 
under examination or cross-examination - i don't know which - and 
was striking her, and the bench, and everybody present, with awe. 
if anybody, of whatsoever degree, said a word that he didn't 
approve of, he instantly required to have it "taken down." if 
anybody wouldn't make an admission, he said, "i'll have it out of 
you!" and if anybody made an admission, he said, "now i have got 
you!" the magistrates shivered under a single bite of his finger. 
thieves and thieftakers hung in dread rapture on his words, and 
shrank when a hair of his eyebrows turned in their direction. which 
side he was on, i couldn't make out, for he seemed to me to be 
grinding the whole place in a mill; i only know that when i stole 
out on tiptoe, he was not on the side of the bench; for, he was 
making the legs of the old gentleman who presided, quite convulsive 
under the table, by his denunciations of his conduct as the 
representative of british law and justice in that chair that day. 
chapter 25 
bentley drummle, who was so sulky a fellow that he even took up a 
book as if its writer had done him an injury, did not take up an 
acquaintance in a more agreeable spirit. heavy in figure, movement, 
and comprehension - in the sluggish complexion of his face, and in 
the large awkward tongue that seemed to loll about in his mouth as 
he himself lolled about in a room - he was idle, proud, niggardly, 
reserved, and suspicious. he came of rich people down in 
somersetshire, who had nursed this combination of qualities until 
they made the discovery that it was just of age and a blockhead. 
thus, bentley drummle had come to mr. pocket when he was a head 
taller than that gentleman, and half a dozen heads thicker than 
most gentlemen. 
startop had been spoilt by a weak mother and kept at home when he 
ought to have been at school, but he was devotedly attached to her, 
and admired her beyond measure. he had a woman's delicacy of 
feature, and was - "as you may see, though you never saw her," said 
herbert to me - exactly like his mother. it was but natural that i 
should take to him much more kindly than to drummle, and that, even 
in the earliest evenings of our boating, he and i should pull 
homeward abreast of one another, conversing from boat to boat, 
while bentley drummle came up in our wake alone, under the 
overhanging banks and among the rushes. he would always creep 
in-shore like some uncomfortable amphibious creature, even when the 
tide would have sent him fast upon his way; and i always think of 
him as coming after us in the dark or by the back-water, when our 
own two boats were breaking the sunset or the moonlight in 
mid-stream. 
herbert was my intimate companion and friend. i presented him with 
a half-share in my boat, which was the occasion of his often coming 
down to hammersmith; and my possession of a halfshare in his 
chambers often took me up to london. we used to walk between the 
two places at all hours. i have an affection for the road yet 
(though it is not so pleasant a road as it was then), formed in the 
impressibility of untried youth and hope. 
when i had been in mr. pocket's family a month or two, mr. and mrs. 
camilla turned up. camilla was mr. pocket's sister. georgiana, whom 
i had seen at miss havisham's on the same occasion, also turned up. 
she was a cousin - an indigestive single woman, who called her 
rigidity religion, and her liver love. these people hated me with 
the hatred of cupidity and disappointment. as a matter of course, 
they fawned upon me in my prosperity with the basest meanness. 
towards mr. pocket, as a grown-up infant with no notion of his own 
interests, they showed the complacent forbearance i had heard them 
express. mrs. pocket they held in contempt; but they allowed the 
poor soul to have been heavily disappointed in life, because that 
shed a feeble reflected light upon themselves. 
these were the surroundings among which i settled down, and applied 
myself to my education. i soon contracted expensive habits, and 
began to spend an amount of money that within a few short months i 
should have thought almost fabulous; but through good and evil i 
stuck to my books. there was no other merit in this, than my having 
sense enough to feel my deficiencies. between mr. pocket and herbert 
i got on fast; and, with one or the other always at my elbow to 
give me the start i wanted, and clear obstructions out of my road, 
i must have been as great a dolt as drummle if i had done less. 
i had not seen mr. wemmick for some weeks, when i thought i would 
write him a note and propose to go home with him on a certain 
evening. he replied that it would give him much pleasure, and that 
he would expect me at the office at six o'clock. thither i went, 
and there i found him, putting the key of his safe down his back as 
the clock struck. 
"did you think of walking down to walworth?" said he. 
"certainly," said i, "if you approve." 
"very much," was wemmick's reply, "for i have had my legs under the 
desk all day, and shall be glad to stretch them. now, i'll tell you 
what i have got for supper, mr. pip. i have got a stewed steak - 
which is of home preparation - and a cold roast fowl - which is 
from the cook's-shop. i think it's tender, because the master of 
the shop was a juryman in some cases of ours the other day, and we 
let him down easy. i reminded him of it when i bought the fowl, and 
i said, "pick us out a good one, old briton, because if we had 
chosen to keep you in the box another day or two, we could easily 
have done it." he said to that, "let me make you a present of the 
best fowl in the shop." i let him, of course. as far as it goes, 
it's property and portable. you don't object to an aged parent, i 
hope?" 
i really thought he was still speaking of the fowl, until he added, 
"because i have got an aged parent at my place." i then said what 
politeness required. 
"so, you haven't dined with mr. jaggers yet?" he pursued, as we 
walked along. 
"not yet." 
"he told me so this afternoon when he heard you were coming. i 
expect you'll have an invitation to-morrow. he's going to ask your 
pals, too. three of 'em; ain't there?" 
although i was not in the habit of counting drummle as one of my 
intimate associates, i answered, "yes." 
"well, he's going to ask the whole gang;" i hardly felt 
complimented by the word; "and whatever he gives you, he'll give 
you good. don't look forward to variety, but you'll have 
excellence. and there'sa nother rum thing in his house," proceeded 
wemmick, after a moment's pause, as if the remark followed on the 
housekeeper understood; "he never lets a door or window be fastened 
at night." 
"is he never robbed?" 
"that's it!" returned wemmick. "he says, and gives it out publicly, 
"i want to see the man who'll rob me." lord bless you, i have heard 
him, a hundred times if i have heard him once, say to regular 
cracksmen in our front office, "you know where i live; now, no bolt 
is ever drawn there; why don't you do a stroke of business with me? 
come; can't i tempt you?" not a man of them, sir, would be bold 
enough to try it on, for love or money." 
"they dread him so much?" said i. 
"dread him," said wemmick. "i believe you they dread him. not but 
what he's artful, even in his defiance of them. no silver, sir. 
britannia metal, every spoon." 
"so they wouldn't have much," i observed, "even if they-" 
"ah! but he would have much," said wemmick, cutting me short, "and 
they know it. he'd have their lives, and the lives of scores of 
'em. he'd have all he could get. and it's impossible to say what he 
couldn't get, if he gave his mind to it." 
i was falling into meditation on my guardian's greatness, when 
wemmick remarked: 
"as to the absence of plate, that's only his natural depth, you 
know. a river's its natural depth, and he's his natural depth. look 
at his watch-chain. that's real enough." 
"it's very massive," said i. 
"massive?" repeated wemmick. "i think so. and his watch is a gold 
repeater, and worth a hundred pound if it's worth a penny. mr. pip, 
there are about seven hundred thieves in this town who know all 
about that watch; there's not a man, a woman, or a child, among 
them, who wouldn't identify the smallest link in that chain, and 
drop it as if it was red-hot, if inveigled into touching it." 
at first with such discourse, and afterwards with conversation of a 
more general nature, did mr. wemmick and i beguile the time and the 
road, until he gave me to understand that we had arrived in the 
district of walworth. 
it appeared to be a collection of back lanes, ditches, and little 
gardens, and to present the aspect of a rather dull retirement. 
wemmick's house was a little wooden cottage in the midst of plots 
of garden, and the top of it was cut out and painted like a battery 
mounted with guns. 
"my own doing," said wemmick. "looks pretty; don't it?" 
i highly commended it, i think it was the smallest house i ever 
saw; with the queerest gothic windows (by far the greater part of 
them sham), and a gothic door, almost too small to get in at. 
"that's a real flagstaff, you see," said wemmick, "and on sundays i 
run up a real flag. then look here. after i have crossed this 
bridge, i hoist it up - so - and cut off the communication." 
the bridge was a plank, and it crossed a chasm about four feet wide 
and two deep. but it was very pleasant to see the pride with which 
he hoisted it up and made it fast; smiling as he did so, with a 
relish and not merely mechanically. 
"at nine o'clock every night, greenwich time," said wemmick, "the 
gun fires. there he is, you see! and when you hear him go, i think 
you'll say he's a stinger." 
the piece of ordnance referred to, was mounted in a separate 
fortress, constructed of lattice-work. it was protected from the 
weather by an ingenious little tarpaulin contrivance in the nature 
of an umbrella. 
"then, at the back," said wemmick, "out of sight, so as not to 
impede the idea of fortifications - for it's a principle with me, 
if you have an idea, carry it out and keep it up - i don't know 
whether that's your opinion-" 
i said, decidedly. 
" - at the back, there's a pig, and there are fowls and rabbits; 
then, i knock together my own little frame, you see, and grow 
cucumbers; and you'll judge at supper what sort of a salad i can 
raise. so, sir," said wemmick, smiling again, but seriously too, as 
he shook his head, "if you can suppose the little place besieged, 
it would hold out a devil of a time in point of provisions." 
then, he conducted me to a bower about a dozen yards off, but which 
was approached by such ingenious twists of path that it took quite 
a long time to get at; and in this retreat our glasses were already 
set forth. our punch was cooling in an ornamental lake, on whose 
margin the bower was raised. this piece of water (with an island in 
the middle which might have been the salad for supper) was of a 
circular form, and he had constructed a fountain in it, which, when 
you set a little mill going and took a cork out of a pipe, played 
to that powerful extent that it made the back of your hand quite 
wet. 
"i am my own engineer, and my own carpenter, and my own plumber, 
and my own gardener, and my own jack of all trades," said wemmick, 
in acknowledging my compliments. "well; it's a good thing, you 
know. it brushes the newgate cobwebs away, and pleases the aged. 
you wouldn't mind being at once introduced to the aged, would you? 
it wouldn't put you out?" 
i expressed the readiness i felt, and we went into the castle. 
there, we found, sitting by a fire, a very old man in a flannel 
coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but 
intensely deaf. 
"well aged parent," said wemmick, shaking hands with him in a 
cordial and jocose way, "how am you?" 
"all right, john; all right!" replied the old man. 
"here's mr. pip, aged parent," said wemmick, "and i wish you could 
hear his name. nod away at him, mr. pip; that's what he likes. nod 
away at him, if you please, like winking!" 
"this is a fine place of my son's, sir," cried the old man, while i 
nodded as hard as i possibly could. "this is a pretty 
pleasure-ground, sir. this spot and these beautiful works upon it 
ought to be kept together by the nation, after my son's time, for 
the people's enjoyment." 
"you're as proud of it as punch; ain't you, aged?" said wemmick, 
contemplating the old man, with his hard face really softened; 
"there's a nod for you;" giving him a tremendous one; "there's 
another for you;" giving him a still more tremendous one; "you like 
that, don't you? if you're not tired, mr. pip - though i know it's 
tiring to strangers - will you tip him one more? you can't think 
how it pleases him." 
i tipped him several more, and he was in great spirits. we left him 
bestirring himself to feed the fowls, and we sat down to our punch 
in the arbour; where wemmick told me as he smoked a pipe that it 
had taken him a good many years to bring the property up to its 
present pitch of perfection. 
"is it your own, mr. wemmick?" 
"o yes," said wemmick, "i have got hold of it, a bit at a time. 
it's a freehold, by george!" 
"is it, indeed? i hope mr. jaggers admires it?" 
"never seen it," said wemmick. "never heard of it. never seen the 
aged. never heard of him. no; the office is one thing, and private 
life is another. when i go into the office, i leave the castle 
behind me, and when i come into the castle, i leave the office 
behind me. if it's not in any way disagreeable to you, you'll 
oblige me by doing the same. i don't wish it professionally spoken 
about." 
of course i felt my good faith involved in the observance of his 
request. the punch being very nice, we sat there drinking it and 
talking, until it was almost nine o'clock. "getting near gun-fire," 
said wemmick then, as he laid down his pipe; "it's the aged's 
treat." 
proceeding into the castle again, we found the aged heating the 
poker, with expectant eyes, as a preliminary to the performance of 
this great nightly ceremony. wemmick stood with his watch in his 
hand, until the moment was come for him to take the red-hot poker 
from the aged, and repair to the battery. he took it, and went out, 
and presently the stinger went off with a bang that shook the crazy 
little box of a cottage as if it must fall to pieces, and made 
every glass and teacup in it ring. upon this, the aged - who i 
believe would have been blown out of his arm-chair but for holding 
on by the elbows - cried out exultingly, "he's fired! i heerd him!" 
and i nodded at the old gentleman until it is no figure of speech 
to declare that i absolutely could not see him. 
the interval between that time and supper, wemmick devoted to 
showing me his collection of curiosities. they were mostly of a 
felonious character; comprising the pen with which a celebrated 
forgery had been committed, a distinguished razor or two, some 
locks of hair, and several manuscript confessions written under 
condemnation - upon which mr. wemmick set particular value as being, 
to use his own words, "every one of 'em lies, sir." these were 
agreeably dispersed among small specimens of china and glass, 
various neat trifles made by the proprietor of the museum, and some 
tobacco-stoppers carved by the aged. they were all displayed in 
that chamber of the castle into which i had been first inducted, 
and which served, not only as the general sitting-room but as the 
kitchen too, if i might judge from a saucepan on the hob, and a 
brazen bijou over the fireplace designed for the suspension of a 
roasting-jack. 
there was a neat little girl in attendance, who looked after the 
aged in the day. when she had laid the supper-cloth, the bridge was 
lowered to give her means of egress, and she withdrew for the 
night. the supper was excellent; and though the castle was rather 
subject to dry-rot insomuch that it tasted like a bad nut, and 
though the pig might have been farther off, i was heartily pleased 
with my whole entertainment. nor was there any drawback on my 
little turret bedroom, beyond there being such a very thin ceiling 
between me and the flagstaff, that when i lay down on my back in 
bed, it seemed as if i had to balance that pole on my forehead all 
night. 
wemmick was up early in the morning, and i am afraid i heard him 
cleaning my boots. after that, he fell to gardening, and i saw him 
from my gothic window pretending to employ the aged, and nodding at 
him in a most devoted manner. our breakfast was as good as the 
supper, and at half-past eight precisely we started for little 
britain. by degrees, wemmick got dryer and harder as we went along, 
and his mouth tightened into a post-office again. at last, when we 
got to his place of business and he pulled out his key from his 
coat-collar, he looked as unconscious of his walworth property as 
if the castle and the drawbridge and the arbour and the lake and 
the fountain and the aged, had all been blown into space together 
by the last discharge of the stinger. 
chapter 26 
it fell out as wemmick had told me it would, that i had an early 
opportunity of comparing my guardian's establishment with that of 
his cashier and clerk. my guardian was in his room, washing his 
hands with his scented soap, when i went into the office from 
walworth; and he called me to him, and gave me the invitation for 
myself and friends which wemmick had prepared me to receive. "no 
ceremony," he stipulated, "and no dinner dress, and say tomorrow." 
i asked him where we should come to (for i had no idea where he 
lived), and i believe it was in his general objection to make 
anything like an admission, that he replied, "come here, and i'll 
take you home with me." i embrace this opportunity of remarking 
that he washed his clients off, as if he were a surgeon or a 
dentist. he had a closet in his room, fitted up for the purpose, 
which smelt of the scented soap like a perfumer's shop. it had an 
unusually large jack-towel on a roller inside the door, and he 
would wash his hands, and wipe them and dry them all over this 
towel, whenever he came in from a police-court or dismissed a 
client from his room. when i and my friends repaired to him at six 
o'clock next day, he seemed to have been engaged on a case of a 
darker complexion than usual, for, we found him with his head 
butted into this closet, not only washing his hands, but laving his 
face and gargling his throat. and even when he had done all that, 
and had gone all round the jack-towel, he took out his penknife and 
scraped the case out of his nails before he put his coat on. 
there were some people slinking about as usual when we passed out 
into the street, who were evidently anxious to speak with him; but 
there was something so conclusive in the halo of scented soap which 
encircled his presence, that they gave it up for that day. as we 
walked along westward, he was recognized ever and again by some 
face in the crowd of the streets, and whenever that happened he 
talked louder to me; but he never otherwise recognized anybody, or 
took notice that anybody recognized him. 
he conducted us to gerrard-street, soho, to a house on the south 
side of that street. rather a stately house of its kind, but 
dolefully in want of painting, and with dirty windows. he took out 
his key and opened the door, and we all went into a stone hall, 
bare, gloomy, and little used. so, up a dark brown staircase into a 
series of three dark brown rooms on the first floor. there were 
carved garlands on the panelled walls, and as he stood among them 
giving us welcome, i know what kind of loops i thought they looked 
like. 
dinner was laid in the best of these rooms; the second was his 
dressing-room; the third, his bedroom. he told us that he held the 
whole house, but rarely used more of it than we saw. the table was 
comfortably laid - no silver in the service, of course - and at the 
side of his chair was a capacious dumb-waiter, with a variety of 
bottles and decanters on it, and four dishes of fruit for dessert. 
i noticed throughout, that he kept everything under his own hand, 
and distributed everything himself. 
there was a bookcase in the room; i saw, from the backs of the 
books, that they were about evidence, criminal law, criminal 
biography, trials, acts of parliament, and such things. the 
furniture was all very solid and good, like his watch-chain. it had 
an official look, however, and there was nothing merely ornamental 
to be seen. in a corner, was a little table of papers with a shaded 
lamp: so that he seemed to bring the office home with him in that 
respect too, and to wheel it out of an evening and fall to work. 
as he had scarcely seen my three companions until now - for, he and 
i had walked together - he stood on the hearth-rug, after ringing 
the bell, and took a searching look at them. to my surprise, he 
seemed at once to be principally if not solely interested in 
drummle. 
"pip," said he, putting his large hand on my shoulder and moving me 
to the window, "i don't know one from the other. who's the spider?" 
"the spider?" said i. 
"the blotchy, sprawly, sulky fellow." 
"that's bentley drummle," i replied; "the one with the delicate 
face is startop." 
not making the least account of "the one with the delicate face," 
he returned, "bentley drummle is his name, is it? i like the look 
of that fellow." 
he immediately began to talk to drummle: not at all deterred by his 
replying in his heavy reticent way, but apparently led on by it to 
screw discourse out of him. i was looking at the two, when there 
came between me and them, the housekeeper, with the first dish for 
the table. 
she was a woman of about forty, i supposed - but i may have thought 
her younger than she was. rather tall, of a lithe nimble figure, 
extremely pale, with large faded eyes, and a quantity of streaming 
hair. i cannot say whether any diseased affection of the heart 
caused her lips to be parted as if she were panting, and her face 
to bear a curious expression of suddenness and flutter; but i know 
that i had been to see macbeth at the theatre, a night or two 
before, and that her face looked to me as if it were all disturbed 
by fiery air, like the faces i had seen rise out of the witches' 
caldron. 
she set the dish on, touched my guardian quietly on the arm with a 
finger to notify that dinner was ready, and vanished. we took our 
seats at the round table, and my guardian kept drummle on one side 
of him, while startop sat on the other. it was a noble dish of fish 
that the housekeeper had put on table, and we had a joint of 
equally choice mutton afterwards, and then an equally choice bird. 
sauces, wines, all the accessories we wanted, and all of the best, 
were given out by our host from his dumb-waiter; and when they had 
made the circuit of the table, he always put them back again. 
similarly, he dealt us clean plates and knives and forks, for each 
course, and dropped those just disused into two baskets on the 
ground by his chair. no other attendant than the housekeeper 
appeared. she set on every dish; and i always saw in her face, a 
face rising out of the caldron. years afterwards, i made a dreadful 
likeness of that woman, by causing a face that had no other natural 
resemblance to it than it derived from flowing hair, to pass behind 
a bowl of flaming spirits in a dark room. 
induced to take particular notice of the housekeeper, both by her 
own striking appearance and by wemmick's preparation, i observed 
that whenever she was in the room, she kept her eyes attentively on 
my guardian, and that she would remove her hands from any dish she 
put before him, hesitatingly, as if she dreaded his calling her 
back, and wanted him to speak when she was nigh, if he had anything 
to say. i fancied that i could detect in his manner a consciousness 
of this, and a purpose of always holding her in suspense. 
dinner went off gaily, and, although my guardian seemed to follow 
rather than originate subjects, i knew that he wrenched the weakest 
part of our dispositions out of us. for myself, i found that i was 
expressing my tendency to lavish expenditure, and to patronize 
herbert, and to boast of my great prospects, before i quite knew 
that i had opened my lips. it was so with all of us, but with no 
one more than drummle: the development of whose inclination to gird 
in a grudging and suspicious way at the rest, was screwed out of 
him before the fish was taken off. 
it was not then, but when we had got to the cheese, that our 
conversation turned upon our rowing feats, and that drummle was 
rallied for coming up behind of a night in that slow amphibious way 
of his. drummle upon this, informed our host that he much preferred 
our room to our company, and that as to skill he was more than our 
master, and that as to strength he could scatter us like chaff. by 
some invisible agency, my guardian wound him up to a pitch little 
short of ferocity about this trifle; and he fell to baring and 
spanning his arm to show how muscular it was, and we all fell to 
baring and spanning our arms in a ridiculous manner. 
now, the housekeeper was at that time clearing the table; my 
guardian, taking no heed of her, but with the side of his face 
turned from her, was leaning back in his chair biting the side of 
his forefinger and showing an interest in drummle, that, to me, was 
quite inexplicable. suddenly, he clapped his large hand on the 
housekeeper's, like a trap, as she stretched it across the table. 
so suddenly and smartly did he do this, that we all stopped in our 
foolish contention. 
"if you talk of strength," said mr. jaggers, "i'll show you a wrist. 
molly, let them see your wrist." 
her entrapped hand was on the table, but she had already put her 
other hand behind her waist. "master," she said, in a low voice, 
with her eyes attentively and entreatingly fixed upon him. "don't." 
"i'll show you a wrist," repeated mr. jaggers, with an immovable 
determination to show it. "molly, let them see your wrist." 
"master," she again murmured. "please!" 
"molly," said mr. jaggers, not looking at her, but obstinately 
looking at the opposite side of the room, "let them see both your 
wrists. show them. come!" 
he took his hand from hers, and turned that wrist up on the table. 
she brought her other hand from behind her, and held the two out 
side by side. the last wrist was much disfigured - deeply scarred 
and scarred across and across. when she held her hands out, she 
took her eyes from mr. jaggers, and turned them watchfully on every 
one of the rest of us in succession. 
"there's power here," said mr. jaggers, coolly tracing out the 
sinews with his forefinger. "very few men have the power of wrist 
that this woman has. it's remarkable what mere force of grip there 
is in these hands. i have had occasion to notice many hands; but i 
never saw stronger in that respect, man's or woman's, than these." 
while he said these words in a leisurely critical style, she 
continued to look at every one of us in regular succession as we 
sat. the moment he ceased, she looked at him again. "that'll do, 
molly," said mr. jaggers, giving her a slight nod; "you have been 
admired, and can go." she withdrew her hands and went out of the 
room, and mr. jaggers, putting the decanters on from his dumbwaiter, 
filled his glass and passed round the wine. 
"at half-past nine, gentlemen," said he, "we must break up. pray 
make the best use of your time. i am glad to see you all. mr. 
drummle, i drink to you." 
if his object in singling out drummle were to bring him out still 
more, it perfectly succeeded. in a sulky triumph, drummle showed 
his morose depreciation of the rest of us, in a more and more 
offensive degree until he became downright intolerable. through all 
his stages, mr. jaggers followed him with the same strange interest. 
he actually seemed to serve as a zest to mr. jaggers's wine. 
in our boyish want of discretion i dare say we took too much to 
drink, and i know we talked too much. we became particularly hot 
upon some boorish sneer of drummle's, to the effect that we were 
too free with our money. it led to my remarking, with more zeal 
than discretion, that it came with a bad grace from him, to whom 
startop had lent money in my presence but a week or so before. 
"well," retorted drummle; "he'll be paid." 
"i don't mean to imply that he won't," said i, "but it might make 
you hold your tongue about us and our money, i should think." 
"you should think!" retorted drummle. "oh lord!" 
"i dare say," i went on, meaning to be very severe, "that you 
wouldn't lend money to any of us, if we wanted it." 
"you are right," said drummle. "i wouldn't lend one of you a 
sixpence. i wouldn't lend anybody a sixpence." 
"rather mean to borrow under those circumstances, i should say." 
"you should say," repeated drummle. "oh lord!" 
this was so very aggravating - the more especially as i found 
myself making no way against his surly obtuseness - that i said, 
disregarding herbert's efforts to check me: 
"come, mr. drummle, since we are on the subject, i'll tell you what 
passed between herbert here and me, when you borrowed that money." 
"i don't want to know what passed between herbert there and you," 
growled drummle. and i think he added in a lower growl, that we 
might both go to the devil and shake ourselves. 
"i'll tell you, however," said i, "whether you want to know or not. 
we said that as you put it in your pocket very glad to get it, you 
seemed to be immensely amused at his being so weak as to lend it." 
drummle laughed outright, and sat laughing in our faces, with his 
hands in his pockets and his round shoulders raised: plainly 
signifying that it was quite true, and that he despised us, as 
asses all. 
hereupon startop took him in hand, though with a much better grace 
than i had shown, and exhorted him to be a little more agreeable. 
startop, being a lively bright young fellow, and drummle being the 
exact opposite, the latter was always disposed to resent him as a 
direct personal affront. he now retorted in a coarse lumpish way, 
and startop tried to turn the discussion aside with some small 
pleasantry that made us all laugh. resenting this little success 
more than anything, drummle, without any threat or warning, pulled 
his hands out of his pockets, dropped his round shoulders, swore, 
took up a large glass, and would have flung it at his adversary's 
head, but for our entertainer's dexterously seizing it at the 
instant when it was raised for that purpose. 
"gentlemen," said mr. jaggers, deliberately putting down the glass, 
and hauling out his gold repeater by its massive chain, "i am 
exceedingly sorry to announce that it's half-past nine." 
on this hint we all rose to depart. before we got to the street 
door, startop was cheerily calling drummle "old boy," as if nothing 
had happened. but the old boy was so far from responding, that he 
would not even walk to hammersmith on the same side of the way; so, 
herbert and i, who remained in town, saw them going down the street 
on opposite sides; startop leading, and drummle lagging behind in 
the shadow of the houses, much as he was wont to follow in his 
boat. 
as the door was not yet shut, i thought i would leave herbert there 
for a moment, and run up-stairs again to say a word to my guardian. 
i found him in his dressing-room surrounded by his stock of boots, 
already hard at it, washing his hands of us. 
i told him i had come up again to say how sorry i was that anything 
disagreeable should have occurred, and that i hoped he would not 
blame me much. 
"pooh!" said he, sluicing his face, and speaking through the 
water-drops; "it's nothing, pip. i like that spider though." 
he had turned towards me now, and was shaking his head, and 
blowing, and towelling himself. 
"i am glad you like him, sir," said i - "but i don't." 
"no, no," my guardian assented; "don't have too much to do with 
him. keep as clear of him as you can. but i like the fellow, pip; 
he is one of the true sort. why, if i was a fortune-teller-" 
looking out of the towel, he caught my eye. 
"but i am not a fortune-teller," he said, letting his head drop 
into a festoon of towel, and towelling away at his two ears. "you 
know what i am, don't you? good-night, pip." 
"good-night, sir." 
in about a month after that, the spider's time with mr. pocket was 
up for good, and, to the great relief of all the house but mrs. 
pocket, he went home to the family hole. 
chapter 27 
"my dear mr pip, 
"i write this by request of mr. gargery, for to let you know that he 
is going to london in company with mr. wopsle and would be glad if 
agreeable to be allowed to see you. he would call at barnard's 
hotel tuesday morning 9 o'clock, when if not agreeable please 
leave word. your poor sister is much the same as when you left. we 
talk of you in the kitchen every night, and wonder what you are 
saying and doing. if now considered in the light of a liberty, 
excuse it for the love of poor old days. no more, dear mr. pip, from 
"your ever obliged, and affectionate servant, 
"biddy." 
"p.s. he wishes me most particular to write what larks. he says you 
will understand. i hope and do not doubt it will be agreeable to 
see him even though a gentleman, for you had ever a good heart, and 
he is a worthy worthy man. i have read him all excepting only the 
last little sentence, and he wishes me most particular to write 
again what larks." 
i received this letter by the post on monday morning, and therefore 
its appointment was for next day. let me confess exactly, with what 
feelings i looked forward to joe's coming. 
not with pleasure, though i was bound to him by so many ties; no; 
with considerable disturbance, some mortification, and a keen sense 
of incongruity. if i could have kept him away by paying money, i 
certainly would have paid money. my greatest reassurance was, that 
he was coming to barnard's inn, not to hammersmith, and 
consequently would not fall in bentley drummle's way. i had little 
objection to his being seen by herbert or his father, for both of 
whom i had a respect; but i had the sharpest sensitiveness as to 
his being seen by drummle, whom i held in contempt. so, throughout 
life, our worst weaknesses and meannesses are usually committed for 
the sake of the people whom we most despise. 
i had begun to be always decorating the chambers in some quite 
unnecessary and inappropriate way or other, and very expensive 
those wrestles with barnard proved to be. by this time, the rooms 
were vastly different from what i had found them, and i enjoyed the 
honour of occupying a few prominent pages in the books of a 
neighbouring upholsterer. i had got on so fast of late, that i had 
even started a boy in boots - top boots - in bondage and slavery to 
whom i might have been said to pass my days. for, after i had made 
the monster (out of the refuse of my washerwoman's family) and had 
clothed him with a blue coat, canary waistcoat, white cravat, 
creamy breeches, and the boots already mentioned, i had to find him 
a little to do and a great deal to eat; and with both of those 
horrible requirements he haunted my existence. 
this avenging phantom was ordered to be on duty at eight on tuesday 
morning in the hall (it was two feet square, as charged for 
floorcloth), and herbert suggested certain things for breakfast 
that he thought joe would like. while i felt sincerely obliged to 
him for being so interested and considerate, i had an odd 
half-provoked sense of suspicion upon me, that if joe had been 
coming to see him, he wouldn't have been quite so brisk about it. 
however, i came into town on the monday night to be ready for joe, 
and i got up early in the morning, and caused the sittingroom and 
breakfast-table to assume their most splendid appearance. 
unfortunately the morning was drizzly, and an angel could not have 
concealed the fact that barnard was shedding sooty tears outside the 
window, like some weak giant of a sweep. 
as the time approached i should have liked to run away, but the 
avenger pursuant to orders was in the hall, and presently i heard 
joe on the staircase. i knew it was joe, by his clumsy manner of 
coming up-stairs - his state boots being always too big for him - 
and by the time it took him to read the names on the other floors 
in the course of his ascent. when at last he stopped outside our 
door, i could hear his finger tracing over the painted letters of 
my name, and i afterwards distinctly heard him breathing in at the 
keyhole. finally he gave a faint single rap, and pepper - such was 
the compromising name of the avenging boy - announced "mr. gargery!" 
i thought he never would have done wiping his feet, and that i must 
have gone out to lift him off the mat, but at last he came in. 
"joe, how are you, joe?" 
"pip, how air you, pip?" 
with his good honest face all glowing and shining, and his hat put 
down on the floor between us, he caught both my hands and worked 
them straight up and down, as if i had been the lastpatented pump. 
"i am glad to see you, joe. give me your hat." 
but joe, taking it up carefully with both hands, like a bird's-nest 
with eggs in it, wouldn't hear of parting with that piece of 
property, and persisted in standing talking over it in a most 
uncomfortable way. 
"which you have that growed," said joe, "and that swelled, and that 
gentle-folked;" joe considered a little before he discovered this 
word; "as to be sure you are a honour to your king and country." 
"and you, joe, look wonderfully well." 
"thank god," said joe, "i'm ekerval to most. and your sister, she's 
no worse than she were. and biddy, she's ever right and ready. and 
all friends is no backerder, if not no forarder. 'ceptin wopsle; 
he's had a drop." 
all this time (still with both hands taking great care of the 
bird's-nest), joe was rolling his eyes round and round the room, 
and round and round the flowered pattern of my dressing-gown. 
"had a drop, joe?" 
"why yes," said joe, lowering his voice, "he's left the church, and 
went into the playacting. which the playacting have likeways 
brought him to london along with me. and his wish were," said joe, 
getting the bird's-nest under his left arm for the moment and 
groping in it for an egg with his right; "if no offence, as i would 
'and you that." 
i took what joe gave me, and found it to be the crumpled playbill 
of a small metropolitan theatre, announcing the first appearance, 
in that very week, of "the celebrated provincial amateur of roscian 
renown, whose unique performance in the highest tragic walk of our 
national bard has lately occasioned so great a sensation in local 
dramatic circles." 
"were you at his performance, joe?" i inquired. 
"i were," said joe, with emphasis and solemnity. 
"was there a great sensation?" 
"why," said joe, "yes, there certainly were a peck of orange-peel. 
partickler, when he see the ghost. though i put it to yourself, 
sir, whether it were calc'lated to keep a man up to his work with a 
good hart, to be continiwally cutting in betwixt him and the ghost 
with "amen!" a man may have had a misfortun' and been in the 
church," said joe, lowering his voice to an argumentative and 
feeling tone, "but that is no reason why you should put him out at 
such a time. which i meantersay, if the ghost of a man's own father 
cannot be allowed to claim his attention, what can, sir? still 
more, when his mourning 'at is unfortunately made so small as that 
the weight of the black feathers brings it off, try to keep it on 
how you may." 
a ghost-seeing effect in joe's own countenance informed me that 
herbert had entered the room. so, i presented joe to herbert, who 
held out his hand; but joe backed from it, and held on by the 
bird's-nest. 
"your servant, sir," said joe, "which i hope as you and pip" - here 
his eye fell on the avenger, who was putting some toast on table, 
and so plainly denoted an intention to make that young gentleman 
one of the family, that i frowned it down and confused him more - 
"i meantersay, you two gentlemen - which i hope as you get your 
elths in this close spot? for the present may be a werry good inn, 
according to london opinions," said joe, confidentially, "and i 
believe its character do stand i; but i wouldn't keep a pig in it 
myself - not in the case that i wished him to fatten wholesome and 
to eat with a meller flavour on him." 
having borne this flattering testimony to the merits of our 
dwelling-place, and having incidentally shown this tendency to call 
me "sir," joe, being invited to sit down to table, looked all round 
the room for a suitable spot on which to deposit his hat - as if it 
were only on some very few rare substances in nature that it could 
find a resting place - and ultimately stood it on an extreme corner 
of the chimney-piece, from which it ever afterwards fell off at 
intervals. 
"do you take tea, or coffee, mr. gargery?" asked herbert, who always 
presided of a morning. 
"thankee, sir," said joe, stiff from head to foot, "i'll take 
whichever is most agreeable to yourself." 
"what do you say to coffee?" 
"thankee, sir," returned joe, evidently dispirited by the proposal, 
"since you are so kind as make chice of coffee, i will not run 
contrairy to your own opinions. but don't you never find it a 
little 'eating?" 
"say tea then," said herbert, pouring it out. 
here joe's hat tumbled off the mantel-piece, and he started out of 
his chair and picked it up, and fitted it to the same exact spot. 
as if it were an absolute point of good breeding that it should 
tumble off again soon. 
"when did you come to town, mr. gargery?" 
"were it yesterday afternoon?" said joe, after coughing behind his 
hand, as if he had had time to catch the whooping-cough since he 
came. "no it were not. yes it were. yes. it were yesterday 
afternoon" (with an appearance of mingled wisdom, relief, and 
strict impartiality). 
"have you seen anything of london, yet?" 
"why, yes, sir," said joe, "me and wopsle went off straight to look 
at the blacking ware'us. but we didn't find that it come up to its 
likeness in the red bills at the shop doors; which i meantersay," 
added joe, in an explanatory manner, "as it is there drawd too 
architectooralooral." 
i really believe joe would have prolonged this word (mightily 
expressive to my mind of some architecture that i know) into a 
perfect chorus, but for his attention being providentially 
attracted by his hat, which was toppling. indeed, it demanded from 
him a constant attention, and a quickness of eye and hand, very 
like that exacted by wicket-keeping. he made extraordinary play 
with it, and showed the greatest skill; now, rushing at it and 
catching it neatly as it dropped; now, merely stopping it midway, 
beating it up, and humouring it in various parts of the room and 
against a good deal of the pattern of the paper on the wall, before 
he felt it safe to close with it; finally, splashing it into the 
slop-basin, where i took the liberty of laying hands upon it. 
as to his shirt-collar, and his coat-collar, they were perplexing 
to reflect upon - insoluble mysteries both. why should a man scrape 
himself to that extent, before he could consider himself full 
dressed? why should he suppose it necessary to be purified by 
suffering for his holiday clothes? then he fell into such 
unaccountable fits of meditation, with his fork midway between his 
plate and his mouth; had his eyes attracted in such strange 
directions; was afflicted with such remarkable coughs; sat so far 
from the table, and dropped so much more than he ate, and pretended 
that he hadn't dropped it; that i was heartily glad when herbert 
left us for the city. 
i had neither the good sense nor the good feeling to know that this 
was all my fault, and that if i had been easier with joe, joe would 
have been easier with me. i felt impatient of him and out of temper 
with him; in which condition he heaped coals of fire on my head. 
"us two being now alone, sir," - began joe. 
"joe," i interrupted, pettishly, "how can you call me, sir?" 
joe looked at me for a single instant with something faintly like 
reproach. utterly preposterous as his cravat was, and as his 
collars were, i was conscious of a sort of dignity in the look. 
"us two being now alone," resumed joe, "and me having the 
intentions and abilities to stay not many minutes more, i will now 
conclude - leastways begin - to mention what have led to my having 
had the present honour. for was it not," said joe, with his old air 
of lucid exposition, "that my only wish were to be useful to you, i 
should not have had the honour of breaking wittles in the company 
and abode of gentlemen." 
i was so unwilling to see the look again, that i made no 
remonstrance against this tone. 
"well, sir," pursued joe, "this is how it were. i were at the 
bargemen t'other night, pip;" whenever he subsided into affection, 
he called me pip, and whenever he relapsed into politeness he 
called me sir; "when there come up in his shay-cart, pumblechook. 
which that same identical," said joe, going down a new track, "do 
comb my 'air the wrong way sometimes, awful, by giving out up and 
down town as it were him which ever had your infant companionation 
and were looked upon as a playfellow by yourself." 
"nonsense. it was you, joe." 
"which i fully believed it were, pip," said joe, slightly tossing 
his head, "though it signify little now, sir. well, pip; this same 
identical, which his manners is given to blusterous, come to me at 
the bargemen (wot a pipe and a pint of beer do give refreshment to 
the working-man, sir, and do not over stimilate), and his word 
were, 'joseph, miss havisham she wish to speak to you.'" 
"miss havisham, joe?" 
"'she wish,' were pumblechook's word, 'to speak to you.'" joe sat 
and rolled his eyes at the ceiling. 
"yes, joe? go on, please." 
"next day, sir," said joe, looking at me as if i were a long way 
off, "having cleaned myself, i go and i see miss a." 
"miss a., joe? miss havisham?" 
"which i say, sir," replied joe, with an air of legal formality, as 
if he were making his will, "miss a., or otherways havisham. her 
expression air then as follering: 'mr. gargery. you air in 
correspondence with mr. pip?' having had a letter from you, i were 
able to say 'i am.' (when i married your sister, sir, i said 'i 
will;' and when i answered your friend, pip, i said 'i am.') 'would 
you tell him, then,' said she, 'that which estella has come home 
and would be glad to see him.'" 
i felt my face fire up as i looked at joe. i hope one remote cause 
of its firing, may have been my consciousness that if i had known 
his errand, i should have given him more encouragement. 
"biddy," pursued joe, "when i got home and asked her fur to write 
the message to you, a little hung back. biddy says, 'i know he will 
be very glad to have it by word of mouth, it is holidaytime, you 
want to see him, go!' i have now concluded, sir," said joe, rising 
from his chair, "and, pip, i wish you ever well and ever prospering 
to a greater and a greater heighth." 
"but you are not going now, joe?" 
"yes i am," said joe. 
"but you are coming back to dinner, joe?" 
"no i am not," said joe. 
our eyes met, and all the "sir" melted out of that manly heart as 
he gave me his hand. 
"pip, dear old chap, life is made of ever so many partings welded 
together, as i may say, and one man's a blacksmith, and one's a 
whitesmith, and one's a goldsmith, and one's a coppersmith. 
diwisions among such must come, and must be met as they come. if 
there's been any fault at all to-day, it's mine. you and me is not 
two figures to be together in london; nor yet anywheres else but 
what is private, and beknown, and understood among friends. it 
ain't that i am proud, but that i want to be right, as you shall 
never see me no more in these clothes. i'm wrong in these clothes. 
i'm wrong out of the forge, the kitchen, or off th' meshes. you 
won't find half so much fault in me if you think of me in my forge 
dress, with my hammer in my hand, or even my pipe. you won't find 
half so much fault in me if, supposing as you should ever wish to 
see me, you come and put your head in at the forge window and see 
joe the blacksmith, there, at the old anvil, in the old burnt 
apron, sticking to the old work. i'm awful dull, but i hope i've 
beat out something nigh the rights of this at last. and so god 
bless you, dear old pip, old chap, god bless you!" 
i had not been mistaken in my fancy that there was a simple dignity 
in him. the fashion of his dress could no more come in its way when 
he spoke these words, than it could come in its way in heaven. he 
touched me gently on the forehead, and went out. as soon as i could 
recover myself sufficiently, i hurried out after him and looked for 
him in the neighbouring streets; but he was gone. 
chapter 28 
it was clear that i must repair to our town next day, and in the 
first flow of my repentance it was equally clear that i must stay 
at joe's. but, when i had secured my box-place by to-morrow's coach 
and had been down to mr. pocket's and back, i was not by any means 
convinced on the last point, and began to invent reasons and make 
excuses for putting up at the blue boar. i should be an 
inconvenience at joe's; i was not expected, and my bed would not be 
ready; i should be too far from miss havisham's, and she was 
exacting and mightn't like it. all other swindlers upon earth are 
nothing to the self-swindlers, and with such pretences did i cheat 
myself. surely a curious thing. that i should innocently take a bad 
half-crown of somebody else's manufacture, is reasonable enough; 
but that i should knowingly reckon the spurious coin of my own 
make, as good money! an obliging stranger, under pretence of 
compactly folding up my bank-notes for security's sake, abstracts 
the notes and gives me nutshells; but what is his sleight of hand 
to mine, when i fold up my own nutshells and pass them on myself as 
notes! 
having settled that i must go to the blue boar, my mind was much 
disturbed by indecision whether or not to take the avenger. it was 
tempting to think of that expensive mercenary publicly airing his 
boots in the archway of the blue boar's posting-yard; it was almost 
solemn to imagine him casually produced in the tailor's shop and 
confounding the disrespectful senses of trabb's boy. on the other 
hand, trabb's boy might worm himself into his intimacy and tell him 
things; or, reckless and desperate wretch as i knew he could be, 
might hoot him in the high-street, my patroness, too, might hear of 
him, and not approve. on the whole, i resolved to leave the avenger 
behind. 
it was the afternoon coach by which i had taken my place, and, as 
winter had now come round, i should not arrive at my destination 
until two or three hours after dark. our time of starting from the 
cross keys was two o'clock. i arrived on the ground with a quarter 
of an hour to spare, attended by the avenger - if i may connect 
that expression with one who never attended on me if he could 
possibly help it. 
at that time it was customary to carry convicts down to the 
dockyards by stage-coach. as i had often heard of them in the 
capacity of outside passengers, and had more than once seen them on 
the high road dangling their ironed legs over the coach roof, i had 
no cause to be surprised when herbert, meeting me in the yard, came 
up and told me there were two convicts going down with me. but i 
had a reason that was an old reason now, for constitutionally 
faltering whenever i heard the word convict. 
"you don't mind them, handel?" said herbert. 
"oh no!" 
"i thought you seemed as if you didn't like them?" 
"i can't pretend that i do like them, and i suppose you don't 
particularly. but i don't mind them." 
"see! there they are," said herbert, "coming out of the tap. what a 
degraded and vile sight it is!" 
they had been treating their guard, i suppose, for they had a 
gaoler with them, and all three came out wiping their mouths on 
their hands. the two convicts were handcuffed together, and had 
irons on their legs - irons of a pattern that i knew well. they 
wore the dress that i likewise knew well. their keeper had a brace 
of pistols, and carried a thick-knobbed bludgeon under his arm; but 
he was on terms of good understanding with them, and stood, with 
them beside him, looking on at the putting-to of the horses, rather 
with an air as if the convicts were an interesting exhibition not 
formally open at the moment, and he the curator. one was a taller 
and stouter man than the other, and appeared as a matter of course, 
according to the mysterious ways of the world both convict and 
free, to have had allotted to him the smaller suit of clothes. his 
arms and legs were like great pincushions of those shapes, and his 
attire disguised him absurdly; but i knew his half-closed eye at 
one glance. there stood the man whom i had seen on the settle at 
the three jolly bargemen on a saturday night, and who had brought 
me down with his invisible gun! 
it was easy to make sure that as yet he knew me no more than if he 
had never seen me in his life. he looked across at me, and his eye 
appraised my watch-chain, and then he incidentally spat and said 
something to the other convict, and they laughed and slued 
themselves round with a clink of their coupling manacle, and looked 
at something else. the great numbers on their backs, as if they 
were street doors; their coarse mangy ungainly outer surface, as if 
they were lower animals; their ironed legs, apologetically 
garlanded with pocket-handkerchiefs; and the way in which all 
present looked at them and kept from them; made them (as herbert 
had said) a most disagreeable and degraded spectacle. 
but this was not the worst of it. it came out that the whole of the 
back of the coach had been taken by a family removing from london, 
and that there were no places for the two prisoners but on the seat 
in front, behind the coachman. hereupon, a choleric gentleman, who 
had taken the fourth place on that seat, flew into a most violent 
passion, and said that it was a breach of contract to mix him up 
with such villainous company, and that it was poisonous and 
pernicious and infamous and shameful, and i don't know what else. 
at this time the coach was ready and the coachman impatient, and we 
were all preparing to get up, and the prisoners had come over with 
their keeper - bringing with them that curious flavour of 
bread-poultice, baize, rope-yarn, and hearthstone, which attends 
the convict presence. 
"don't take it so much amiss, sir," pleaded the keeper to the angry 
passenger; "i'll sit next you myself. i'll put 'em on the outside 
of the row. they won't interfere with you, sir. you needn't know 
they're there." 
"and don't blame me," growled the convict i had recognized. "i 
don't want to go. i am quite ready to stay behind. as fur as i am 
concerned any one's welcome to my place." 
"or mine," said the other, gruffly. "i wouldn't have incommoded 
none of you, if i'd had my way." then, they both laughed, and began 
cracking nuts, and spitting the shells about. - as i really think i 
should have liked to do myself, if i had been in their place and so 
despised. 
at length, it was voted that there was no help for the angry 
gentleman, and that he must either go in his chance company or 
remain behind. so, he got into his place, still making complaints, 
and the keeper got into the place next him, and the convicts hauled 
themselves up as well as they could, and the convict i had 
recognized sat behind me with his breath on the hair of my head. 
"good-bye, handel!" herbert called out as we started. i thought 
what a blessed fortune it was, that he had found another name for 
me than pip. 
it is impossible to express with what acuteness i felt the 
convict's breathing, not only on the back of my head, but all along 
my spine. the sensation was like being touched in the marrow with 
some pungent and searching acid, it set my very teeth on edge. he 
seemed to have more breathing business to do than another man, and 
to make more noise in doing it; and i was conscious of growing 
high-shoulderd on one side, in my shrinking endeavours to fend him 
off. 
the weather was miserably raw, and the two cursed the cold. it made 
us all lethargic before we had gone far, and when we had left the 
half-way house behind, we habitually dozed and shivered and were 
silent. i dozed off, myself, in considering the question whether i 
ought to restore a couple of pounds sterling to this creature 
before losing sight of him, and how it could best be done. in the 
act of dipping forward as if i were going to bathe among the 
horses, i woke in a fright and took the question up again. 
but i must have lost it longer than i had thought, since, although 
i could recognize nothing in the darkness and the fitful lights and 
shadows of our lamps, i traced marsh country in the cold damp wind 
that blew at us. cowering forward for warmth and to make me a 
screen against the wind, the convicts were closer to me than 
before. they very first words i heard them interchange as i became 
conscious were the words of my own thought, "two one pound notes." 
"how did he get 'em?" said the convict i had never seen. 
"how should i know?" returned the other. "he had 'em stowed away 
somehows. giv him by friends, i expect." 
"i wish," said the other, with a bitter curse upon the cold, "that 
i had 'em here." 
"two one pound notes, or friends?" 
"two one pound notes. i'd sell all the friends i ever had, for one, 
and think it a blessed good bargain. well? so he says - ?" 
"so he says," resumed the convict i had recognized - "it was all 
said and done in half a minute, behind a pile of timber in the 
dockyard - 'you're a-going to be discharged?' yes, i was. would i 
find out that boy that had fed him and kep his secret, and give him 
them two one pound notes? yes, i would. and i did." 
"more fool you," growled the other. "i'd have spent 'em on a man, 
in wittles and drink. he must have been a green one. mean to say he 
knowed nothing of you?" 
"not a ha'porth. different gangs and different ships. he was tried 
again for prison breaking, and got made a lifer." 
"and was that - honour! - the only time you worked out, in this 
part of the country?" 
"the only time." 
"what might have been your opinion of the place?" 
"a most beastly place. mudbank, mist, swamp, and work; work, swamp, 
mist, and mudbank." 
they both execrated the place in very strong language, and 
gradually growled themselves out, and had nothing left to say. 
after overhearing this dialogue, i should assuredly have got down 
and been left in the solitude and darkness of the highway, but for 
feeling certain that the man had no suspicion of my identity. 
indeed, i was not only so changed in the course of nature, but so 
differently dressed and so differently circumstanced, that it was 
not at all likely he could have known me without accidental help. 
still, the coincidence of our being together on the coach, was 
sufficiently strange to fill me with a dread that some other 
coincidence might at any moment connect me, in his hearing, with my 
name. for this reason, i resolved to alight as soon as we touched 
the town, and put myself out of his hearing. this device i executed 
successfully. my little portmanteau was in the boot under my feet; 
i had but to turn a hinge to get it out: i threw it down before me, 
got down after it, and was left at the first lamp on the first 
stones of the town pavement. as to the convicts, they went their 
way with the coach, and i knew at what point they would be spirited 
off to the river. in my fancy, i saw the boat with its convict crew 
waiting for them at the slime-washed stairs, - again heard the 
gruff "give way, you!" like and order to dogs - again saw the 
wicked noah's ark lying out on the black water. 
i could not have said what i was afraid of, for my fear was 
altogether undefined and vague, but there was great fear upon me. 
as i walked on to the hotel, i felt that a dread, much exceeding 
the mere apprehension of a painful or disagreeable recognition, 
made me tremble. i am confident that it took no distinctness of 
shape, and that it was the revival for a few minutes of the terror 
of childhood. 
the coffee-room at the blue boar was empty, and i had not only 
ordered my dinner there, but had sat down to it, before the waiter 
knew me. as soon as he had apologized for the remissness of his 
memory, he asked me if he should send boots for mr. pumblechook? 
"no," said i, "certainly not." 
the waiter (it was he who had brought up the great remonstrance 
from the commercials, on the day when i was bound) appeared 
surprised, and took the earliest opportunity of putting a dirty old 
copy of a local newspaper so directly in my way, that i took it up 
and read this paragraph: 
our readers will learn, not altogether without interest, in 
reference to the recent romantic rise in fortune of a young 
artificer in iron of this neighbourhood (what a theme, by the way, 
for the magic pen of our as yet not universally acknowledged 
townsman tooby, the poet of our columns!) that the youth's earliest 
patron, companion, and friend, was a highly-respected individual 
not entirely unconnected with the corn and seed trade, and whose 
eminently convenient and commodious business premises are situate 
within a hundred miles of the high-street. it is not wholly 
irrespective of our personal feelings that we record him as the 
mentor of our young telemachus, for it is good to know that our 
town produced the founder of the latter's fortunes. does the 
thoughtcontracted brow of the local sage or the lustrous eye of 
local beauty inquire whose fortunes? we believe that quintin matsys 
was the blacksmith of antwerp. verb. sap. 
i entertain a conviction, based upon large experience, that if in 
the days of my prosperity i had gone to the north pole, i should 
have met somebody there, wandering esquimaux or civilized man, who 
would have told me that pumblechook was my earliest patron and the 
founder of my fortunes. 
chapter 29 
betimes in the morning i was up and out. it was too early yet to go 
to miss havisham's, so i loitered into the country on miss 
havisham's side of town - which was not joe's side; i could go 
there to-morrow - thinking about my patroness, and painting 
brilliant pictures of her plans for me. 
she had adopted estella, she had as good as adopted me, and it 
could not fail to be her intention to bring us together. she 
reserved it for me to restore the desolate house, admit the 
sunshine into the dark rooms, set the clocks a-going and the cold 
hearths a-blazing, tear down the cobwebs, destroy the vermin - in 
short, do all the shining deeds of the young knight of romance, and 
marry the princess. i had stopped to look at the house as i passed; 
and its seared red brick walls, blocked windows, and strong green 
ivy clasping even the stacks of chimneys with its twigs and 
tendons, as if with sinewy old arms, had made up a rich attractive 
mystery, of which i was the hero. estella was the inspiration of 
it, and the heart of it, of course. but, though she had taken such 
strong possession of me, though my fancy and my hope were so set 
upon her, though her influence on my boyish life and character had 
been all-powerful, i did not, even that romantic morning, invest 
her with any attributes save those she possessed. i mention this in 
this place, of a fixed purpose, because it is the clue by which i 
am to be followed into my poor labyrinth. according to my 
experience, the conventional notion of a lover cannot be always 
true. the unqualified truth is, that when i loved estella with the 
love of a man, i loved her simply because i found her irresistible. 
once for all; i knew to my sorrow, often and often, if not always, 
that i loved her against reason, against promise, against peace, 
against hope, against happiness, against all discouragement that 
could be. once for all; i loved her none the less because i knew 
it, and it had no more influence in restraining me, than if i had 
devoutly believed her to be human perfection. 
i so shaped out my walk as to arrive at the gate at my old time. 
when i had rung at the bell with an unsteady hand, i turned my back 
upon the gate, while i tried to get my breath and keep the beating 
of my heart moderately quiet. i heard the side door open, and steps 
come across the court-yard; but i pretended not to hear, even when 
the gate swung on its rusty hinges. 
being at last touched on the shoulder, i started and turned. i 
started much more naturally then, to find myself confronted by a 
man in a sober grey dress. the last man i should have expected to 
see in that place of porter at miss havisham's door. 
"orlick!" 
"ah, young master, there's more changes than yours. but come in, 
come in. it's opposed to my orders to hold the gate open." 
i entered and he swung it, and locked it, and took the key out. 
"yes!" said he, facing round, after doggedly preceding me a few 
steps towards the house. "here i am!" 
"how did you come here?" 
"i come her," he retorted, "on my legs. i had my box brought 
alongside me in a barrow." 
"are you here for good?" 
"i ain't her for harm, young master, i suppose?" 
i was not so sure of that. i had leisure to entertain the retort in 
my mind, while he slowly lifted his heavy glance from the pavement, 
up my legs and arms, to my face. 
"then you have left the forge?" i said. 
"do this look like a forge?" replied orlick, sending his glance all 
round him with an air of injury. "now, do it look like it?" 
i asked him how long he had left gargery's forge? 
"one day is so like another here," he replied, "that i don't know 
without casting it up. however, i come her some time since you 
left." 
"i could have told you that, orlick." 
"ah!" said he, drily. "but then you've got to be a scholar." 
by this time we had come to the house, where i found his room to be 
one just within the side door, with a little window in it looking 
on the court-yard. in its small proportions, it was not unlike the 
kind of place usually assigned to a gate-porter in paris. certain 
keys were hanging on the wall, to which he now added the gate-key; 
and his patchwork-covered bed was in a little inner division or 
recess. the whole had a slovenly confined and sleepy look, like a 
cage for a human dormouse: while he, looming dark and heavy in the 
shadow of a corner by the window, looked like the human dormouse 
for whom it was fitted up - as indeed he was. 
"i never saw this room before," i remarked; "but there used to be 
no porter here." 
"no," said he; "not till it got about that there was no protection 
on the premises, and it come to be considered dangerous, with 
convicts and tag and rag and bobtail going up and down. and then i 
was recommended to the place as a man who could give another man as 
good as he brought, and i took it. it's easier than bellowsing and 
hammering. - that's loaded, that is." 
my eye had been caught by a gun with a brass bound stock over the 
chimney-piece, and his eye had followed mine. 
"well," said i, not desirous of more conversation, "shall i go up 
to miss havisham?" 
"burn me, if i know!" he retorted, first stretching himself and 
then shaking himself; "my orders ends here, young master. i give 
this here bell a rap with this here hammer, and you go on along the 
passage till you meet somebody." 
"i am expected, i believe?" 
"burn me twice over, if i can say!" said he. 
upon that, i turned down the long passage which i had first trodden 
in my thick boots, and he made his bell sound. at the end of the 
passage, while the bell was still reverberating, i found sarah 
pocket: who appeared to have now become constitutionally green and 
yellow by reason of me. 
"oh!" said she. "you, is it, mr. pip?" 
"it is, miss pocket. i am glad to tell you that mr. pocket and 
family are all well." 
"are they any wiser?" said sarah, with a dismal shake of the head; 
"they had better be wiser, than well. ah, matthew, matthew! you know 
your way, sir?" 
tolerably, for i had gone up the staircase in the dark, many a 
time. i ascended it now, in lighter boots than of yore, and tapped 
in my old way at the door of miss havisham's room. "pip's rap," i 
heard her say, immediately; "come in, pip." 
she was in her chair near the old table, in the old dress, with her 
two hands crossed on her stick, her chin resting on them, and her 
eyes on the fire. sitting near her, with the white shoe that had 
never been worn, in her hand, and her head bent as she looked at 
it, was an elegant lady whom i had never seen. 
"come in, pip," miss havisham continued to mutter, without looking 
round or up; "come in, pip, how do you do, pip? so you kiss my hand 
as if i were a queen, eh? - well?" 
she looked up at me suddenly, only moving her eyes, and repeated in 
a grimly playful manner, 
"well?" 
"i heard, miss havisham," said i, rather at a loss, "that you were 
so kind as to wish me to come and see you, and i came directly." 
"well?" 
the lady whom i had never seen before, lifted up her eyes and 
looked archly at me, and then i saw that the eyes were estella's 
eyes. but she was so much changed, was so much more beautiful, so 
much more womanly, in all things winning admiration had made such 
wonderful advance, that i seemed to have made none. i fancied, as i 
looked at her, that i slipped hopelessly back into the coarse and 
common boy again. o the sense of distance and disparity that came 
upon me, and the inaccessibility that came about her! 
she gave me her hand. i stammered something about the pleasure i 
felt in seeing her again, and about my having looked forward to it 
for a long, long time. 
"do you find her much changed, pip?" asked miss havisham, with her 
greedy look, and striking her stick upon a chair that stood between 
them, as a sign to me to sit down there. 
"when i came in, miss havisham, i thought there was nothing of 
estella in the face or figure; but now it all settles down so 
curiously into the old-" 
"what? you are not going to say into the old estella?" miss 
havisham interrupted. "she was proud and insulting, and you wanted 
to go away from her. don't you remember?" 
i said confusedly that that was long ago, and that i knew no better 
then, and the like. estella smiled with perfect composure, and said 
she had no doubt of my having been quite right, and of her having 
been very disagreeable. 
"is he changed?" miss havisham asked her. 
"very much," said estella, looking at me. 
"less coarse and common?" said miss havisham, playing with 
estella's hair. 
estella laughed, and looked at the shoe in her hand, and laughed 
again, and looked at me, and put the shoe down. she treated me as a 
boy still, but she lured me on. 
we sat in the dreamy room among the old strange influences which 
had so wrought upon me, and i learnt that she had but just come 
home from france, and that she was going to london. proud and 
wilful as of old, she had brought those qualities into such 
subjection to her beauty that it was impossible and out of nature - 
or i thought so - to separate them from her beauty. truly it was 
impossible to dissociate her presence from all those wretched 
hankerings after money and gentility that had disturbed my boyhood 
from all those ill-regulated aspirations that had first made me 
ashamed of home and joe - from all those visions that had raised 
her face in the glowing fire, struck it out of the iron on the 
anvil, extracted it from the darkness of night to look in at the 
wooden window of the forge and flit away. in a word, it was 
impossible for me to separate her, in the past or in the present, 
from the innermost life of my life. 
it was settled that i should stay there all the rest of the day, 
and return to the hotel at night, and to london to-morrow. when we 
had conversed for a while, miss havisham sent us two out to walk in 
the neglected garden: on our coming in by-and-by, she said, i 
should wheel her about a little as in times of yore. 
so, estella and i went out into the garden by the gate through 
which i had strayed to my encounter with the pale young gentleman, 
now herbert; i, trembling in spirit and worshipping the very hem of 
her dress; she, quite composed and most decidedly not worshipping 
the hem of mine. as we drew near to the place of encounter, she 
stopped and said: 
"i must have been a singular little creature to hide and see that 
fight that day: but i did, and i enjoyed it very much." 
"you rewarded me very much." 
"did i?" she replied, in an incidental and forgetful way. "i 
remember i entertained a great objection to your adversary, because 
i took it ill that he should be brought here to pester me with his 
company." 
"he and i are great friends now." 
"are you? i think i recollect though, that you read with his 
father?" 
"yes." 
i made the admission with reluctance, for it seemed to have a 
boyish look, and she already treated me more than enough like a 
boy. 
"since your change of fortune and prospects, you have changed your 
companions," said estella. 
"naturally," said i. 
"and necessarily," she added, in a haughty tone; "what was fit 
company for you once, would be quite unfit company for you now." 
in my conscience, i doubt very much whether i had any lingering 
intention left, of going to see joe; but if i had, this observation 
put it to flight. 
"you had no idea of your impending good fortune, in those times?" 
said estella, with a slight wave of her hand, signifying in the 
fighting times. 
"not the least." 
the air of completeness and superiority with which she walked at my 
side, and the air of youthfulness and submission with which i 
walked at hers, made a contrast that i strongly felt. it would have 
rankled in me more than it did, if i had not regarded myself as 
eliciting it by being so set apart for her and assigned to her. 
the garden was too overgrown and rank for walking in with ease, and 
after we had made the round of it twice or thrice, we came out 
again into the brewery yard. i showed her to a nicety where i had 
seen her walking on the casks, that first old day, and she said, 
with a cold and careless look in that direction, "did i?" i 
reminded her where she had come out of the house and given me my 
meat and drink, and she said, "i don't remember." "not remember 
that you made me cry?" said i. "no," said she, and shook her head 
and looked about her. i verily believe that her not remembering and 
not minding in the least, made me cry again, inwardly - and that is 
the sharpest crying of all. 
"you must know," said estella, condescending to me as a brilliant 
and beautiful woman might, "that i have no heart - if that has 
anything to do with my memory." 
i got through some jargon to the effect that i took the liberty of 
doubting that. that i knew better. that there could be no such 
beauty without it. 
"oh! i have a heart to be stabbed in or shot in, i have no doubt," 
said estella, "and, of course, if it ceased to beat i should cease 
to be. but you know what i mean. i have no softness there, no - 
sympathy - sentiment - nonsense." 
what was it that was borne in upon my mind when she stood still and 
looked attentively at me? anything that i had seen in miss 
havisham? no. in some of her looks and gestures there was that 
tinge of resemblance to miss havisham which may often be noticed to 
have been acquired by children, from grown person with whom they 
have been much associated and secluded, and which, when childhood 
is passed, will produce a remarkable occasional likeness of 
expression between faces that are otherwise quite different. and 
yet i could not trace this to miss havisham. i looked again, and 
though she was still looking at me, the suggestion was gone. 
what was it? 
"i am serious," said estella, not so much with a frown (for her 
brow was smooth) as with a darkening of her face; "if we are to be 
thrown much together, you had better believe it at once. no!" 
imperiously stopping me as i opened my lips. "i have not bestowed 
my tenderness anywhere. i have never had any such thing." 
in another moment we were in the brewery so long disused, and she 
pointed to the high gallery where i had seen her going out on that 
same first day, and told me she remembered to have been up there, 
and to have seen me standing scared below. as my eyes followed her 
white hand, again the same dim suggestion that i could not possibly 
grasp, crossed me. my involuntary start occasioned her to lay her 
hand upon my arm. instantly the ghost passed once more, and was 
gone. 
what was it? 
"what is the matter?" asked estella. "are you scared again?" 
"i should be, if i believed what you said just now," i replied, to 
turn it off. 
"then you don't? very well. it is said, at any rate. miss havisham 
will soon be expecting you at your old post, though i think that 
might be laid aside now, with other old belongings. let us make one 
more round of the garden, and then go in. come! you shall not shed 
tears for my cruelty to-day; you shall be my page, and give me your 
shoulder." 
her handsome dress had trailed upon the ground. she held it in one 
hand now, and with the other lightly touched my shoulder as we 
walked. we walked round the ruined garden twice or thrice more, and 
it was all in bloom for me. if the green and yellow growth of weed 
in the chinks of the old wall had been the most precious flowers 
that ever blew, it could not have been more cherished in my 
remembrance. 
there was no discrepancy of years between us, to remove her far 
from me; we were of nearly the same age, though of course the age 
told for more in her case than in mine; but the air of 
inaccessibility which her beauty and her manner gave her, tormented 
me in the midst of my delight, and at the height of the assurance i 
felt that our patroness had chosen us for one another. wretched 
boy! 
at last we went back into the house, and there i heard, with 
surprise, that my guardian had come down to see miss havisham on 
business, and would come back to dinner. the old wintry branches of 
chandeliers in the room where the mouldering table was spread, had 
been lighted while we were out, and miss havisham was in her chair 
and waiting for me. 
it was like pushing the chair itself back into the past, when we 
began the old slow circuit round about the ashes of the bridal 
feast. but, in the funereal room, with that figure of the grave 
fallen back in the chair fixing its eyes upon her, estella looked 
more bright and beautiful than before, and i was under stronger 
enchantment. 
the time so melted away, that our early dinner-hour drew close at 
hand, and estella left us to prepare herself. we had stopped near 
the centre of the long table, and miss havisham, with one of her 
withered arms stretched out of the chair, rested that clenched hand 
upon the yellow cloth. as estella looked back over her shoulder 
before going out at the door, miss havisham kissed that hand to 
her, with a ravenous intensity that was of its kind quite dreadful. 
then, estella being gone and we two left alone, she turned to me, 
and said in a whisper: 
"is she beautiful, graceful, well-grown? do you admire her?" 
"everybody must who sees her, miss havisham." 
she drew an arm round my neck, and drew my head close down to hers 
as she sat in the chair. "love her, love her, love her! how does 
she use you?" 
before i could answer (if i could have answered so difficult a 
question at all), she repeated, "love her, love her, love her! if 
she favours you, love her. if she wounds you, love her. if she 
tears your heart to pieces - and as it gets older and stronger, it 
will tear deeper - love her, love her, love her!" 
never had i seen such passionate eagerness as was joined to her 
utterance of these words. i could feel the muscles of the thin arm 
round my neck, swell with the vehemence that possessed her. 
"hear me, pip! i adopted her to be loved. i bred her and educated 
her, to be loved. i developed her into what she is, that she might 
be loved. love her!" 
she said the word often enough, and there could be no doubt that 
she meant to say it; but if the often repeated word had been hate 
instead of love - despair - revenge - dire death - it could not 
have sounded from her lips more like a curse. 
"i'll tell you," said she, in the same hurried passionate whisper, 
"what real love is. it is blind devotion, unquestioning 
self-humiliation, utter submission, trust and belief against 
yourself and against the whole world, giving up your whole heart 
and soul to the smiter - as i did!" 
when she came to that, and to a wild cry that followed that, i 
caught her round the waist. for she rose up in the chair, in her 
shroud of a dress, and struck at the air as if she would as soon 
have struck herself against the wall and fallen dead. 
all this passed in a few seconds. as i drew her down into her 
chair, i was conscious of a scent that i knew, and turning, saw my 
guardian in the room. 
he always carried (i have not yet mentioned it, i think) a 
pocket-handkerchief of rich silk and of imposing proportions, which 
was of great value to him in his profession. i have seen him so 
terrify a client or a witness by ceremoniously unfolding this 
pocket-handkerchief as if he were immediately going to blow his 
nose, and then pausing, as if he knew he should not have time to do 
it before such client or witness committed himself, that the 
self-committal has followed directly, quite as a matter of course. 
when i saw him in the room, he had this expressive 
pockethandkerchief in both hands, and was looking at us. on meeting 
my eye, he said plainly, by a momentary and silent pause in that 
attitude, "indeed? singular!" and then put the handkerchief to its 
right use with wonderful effect. 
miss havisham had seen him as soon as i, and was (like everybody 
else) afraid of him. she made a strong attempt to compose herself, 
and stammered that he was as punctual as ever. 
"as punctual as ever," he repeated, coming up to us. "(how do you 
do, pip? shall i give you a ride, miss havisham? once round?) 
and so you are here, pip?" 
i told him when i had arrived, and how miss havisham had wished me 
to come and see estella. to which he replied, "ah! very fine young 
lady!" then he pushed miss havisham in her chair before him, with 
one of his large hands, and put the other in his trousers-pocket as 
if the pocket were full of secrets. 
"well, pip! how often have you seen miss estella before?" said he, 
when he came to a stop. 
"how often?" 
"ah! how many times? ten thousand times?" 
"oh! certainly not so many." 
"twice?" 
"jaggers," interposed miss havisham, much to my relief; "leave my 
pip alone, and go with him to your dinner." 
he complied, and we groped our way down the dark stairs together. 
while we were still on our way to those detached apartments across 
the paved yard at the back, he asked me how often i had seen miss 
havisham eat and drink; offering me a breadth of choice, as usual, 
between a hundred times and once. 
i considered, and said, "never." 
"and never will, pip," he retorted, with a frowning smile. "she has 
never allowed herself to be seen doing either, since she lived this 
present life of hers. she wanders about in the night, and then lays 
hands on such food as she takes." 
"pray, sir," said i, "may i ask you a question?" 
"you may," said he, "and i may decline to answer it. put your 
question." 
"estella's name. is it havisham or - ?" i had nothing to add. 
"or what?" said he. 
"is it havisham?" 
"it is havisham." 
this brought us to the dinner-table, where she and sarah pocket 
awaited us. mr. jaggers presided, estella sat opposite to him, i 
faced my green and yellow friend. we dined very well, and were 
waited on by a maid-servant whom i had never seen in all my comings 
and goings, but who, for anything i know, had been in that 
mysterious house the whole time. after dinner, a bottle of choice 
old port was placed before my guardian (he was evidently well 
acquainted with the vintage), and the two ladies left us. 
anything to equal the determined reticence of mr. jaggers under that 
roof, i never saw elsewhere, even in him. he kept his very looks to 
himself, and scarcely directed his eyes to estella's face once 
during dinner. when she spoke to him, he listened, and in due 
course answered, but never looked at her, that i could see. on the 
other hand, she often looked at him, with interest and curiosity, 
if not distrust, but his face never, showed the least 
consciousness. throughout dinner he took a dry delight in making 
sarah pocket greener and yellower, by often referring in 
conversation with me to my expectations; but here, again, he showed 
no consciousness, and even made it appear that he extorted - and 
even did extort, though i don't know how - those references out of 
my innocent self. 
and when he and i were left alone together, he sat with an air upon 
him of general lying by in consequence of information he possessed, 
that really was too much for me. he cross-examined his very wine 
when he had nothing else in hand. he held it between himself and 
the candle, tasted the port, rolled it in his mouth, swallowed it, 
looked at his glass again, smelt the port, tried it, drank it, 
filled again, and cross-examined the glass again, until i was as 
nervous as if i had known the wine to be telling him something to 
my disadvantage. three or four times i feebly thought i would start 
conversation; but whenever he saw me going to ask him anything, he 
looked at me with his glass in his hand, and rolling his wine about 
in his mouth, as if requesting me to take notice that it was of no 
use, for he couldn't answer. 
i think miss pocket was conscious that the sight of me involved her 
in the danger of being goaded to madness, and perhaps tearing off 
her cap - which was a very hideous one, in the nature of a muslin 
mop - and strewing the ground with her hair - which assuredly had 
never grown on her head. she did not appear when we afterwards went 
up to miss havisham's room, and we four played at whist. in the 
interval, miss havisham, in a fantastic way, had put some of the 
most beautiful jewels from her dressing-table into estella's hair, 
and about her bosom and arms; and i saw even my guardian look at 
her from under his thick eyebrows, and raise them a little, when 
her loveliness was before him, with those rich flushes of glitter 
and colour in it. 
of the manner and extent to which he took our trumps into custody, 
and came out with mean little cards at the ends of hands, before 
which the glory of our kings and queens was utterly abased, i say 
nothing; nor, of the feeling that i had, respecting his looking 
upon us personally in the light of three very obvious and poor 
riddles that he had found out long ago. what i suffered from, was 
the incompatibility between his cold presence and my feelings 
towards estella. it was not that i knew i could never bear to speak 
to him about her, that i knew i could never bear to hear him creak 
his boots at her, that i knew i could never bear to see him wash 
his hands of her; it was, that my admiration should be within a 
foot or two of him - it was, that my feelings should be in the same 
place with him - that, was the agonizing circumstance. 
we played until nine o'clock, and then it was arranged that when 
estella came to london i should be forewarned of her coming and 
should meet her at the coach; and then i took leave of her, and 
touched her and left her. 
my guardian lay at the boar in the next room to mine. far into the 
night, miss havisham's words, "love her, love her, love her!" 
sounded in my ears. i adapted them for my own repetition, and said 
to my pillow, "i love her, i love her, i love her!" hundreds of 
times. then, a burst of gratitude came upon me, that she should be 
destined for me, once the blacksmith's boy. then, i thought if she 
were, as i feared, by no means rapturously grateful for that 
destiny yet, when would she begin to be interested in me? when 
should i awaken the heart within her, that was mute and sleeping 
now? 
ah me! i thought those were high and great emotions. but i never 
thought there was anything low and small in my keeping away from 
joe, because i knew she would be contemptuous of him. it was but a 
day gone, and joe had brought the tears into my eyes; they had soon 
dried, god forgive me! soon dried. 
chapter 30 
after well considering the matter while i was dressing at the blue 
boar in the morning, i resolved to tell my guardian that i doubted 
orlick's being the right sort of man to fill a post of trust at 
miss havisham's. "why, of course he is not the right sort of man, 
pip," said my guardian, comfortably satisfied beforehand on the 
general head, "because the man who fills the post of trust never is 
the right sort of man." it seemed quite to put him into spirits, to 
find that this particular post was not exceptionally held by the 
right sort of man, and he listened in a satisfied manner while i 
told him what knowledge i had of orlick. "very good, pip," he 
observed, when i had concluded, "i'll go round presently, and pay 
our friend off." rather alarmed by this summary action, i was for a 
little delay, and even hinted that our friend himself might be 
difficult to deal with. "oh no he won't," said my guardian, making 
his pocket-handkerchief-point, with perfect confidence; "i should 
like to see him argue the question with me." 
as we were going back together to london by the mid-day coach, and 
as i breakfasted under such terrors of pumblechook that i could 
scarcely hold my cup, this gave me an opportunity of saying that i 
wanted a walk, and that i would go on along the london-road while 
mr. jaggers was occupied, if he would let the coachman know that i 
would get into my place when overtaken. i was thus enabled to fly 
from the blue boar immediately after breakfast. by then making a 
loop of about a couple of miles into the open country at the back 
of pumblechook's premises, i got round into the high-street again, 
a little beyond that pitfall, and felt myself in comparative 
security. 
it was interesting to be in the quiet old town once more, and it 
was not disagreeable to be here and there suddenly recognized and 
stared after. one or two of the tradespeople even darted out of 
their shops and went a little way down the street before me, that 
they might turn, as if they had forgotten something, and pass me 
face to face - on which occasions i don't know whether they or i 
made the worse pretence; they of not doing it, or i of not seeing 
it. still my position was a distinguished one, and i was not at all 
dissatisfied with it, until fate threw me in the way of that 
unlimited miscreant, trabb's boy. 
casting my eyes along the street at a certain point of my progress, 
i beheld trabb's boy approaching, lashing himself with an empty 
blue bag. deeming that a serene and unconscious contemplation of 
him would best beseem me, and would be most likely to quell his 
evil mind, i advanced with that expression of countenance, and was 
rather congratulating myself on my success, when suddenly the knees 
of trabb's boy smote together, his hair uprose, his cap fell off, 
he trembled violently in every limb, staggered out into the road, 
and crying to the populace, "hold me! i'm so frightened!" feigned to 
be in a paroxysm of terror and contrition, occasioned by the 
dignity of my appearance. as i passed him, his teeth loudly 
chattered in his head, and with every mark of extreme humiliation, 
he prostrated himself in the dust. 
this was a hard thing to bear, but this was nothing. i had not 
advanced another two hundred yards, when, to my inexpressible 
terror, amazement, and indignation, i again beheld trabb's boy 
approaching. he was coming round a narrow corner. his blue bag was 
slung over his shoulder, honest industry beamed in his eyes, a 
determination to proceed to trabb's with cheerful briskness was 
indicated in his gait. with a shock he became aware of me, and was 
severely visited as before; but this time his motion was rotatory, 
and he staggered round and round me with knees more afflicted, and 
with uplifted hands as if beseeching for mercy. his sufferings were 
hailed with the greatest joy by a knot of spectators, and i felt 
utterly confounded. 
i had not got as much further down the street as the post-office, 
when i again beheld trabb's boy shooting round by a back way. this 
time, he was entirely changed. he wore the blue bag in the manner 
of my great-coat, and was strutting along the pavement towards me 
on the opposite side of the street, attended by a company of 
delighted young friends to whom he from time to time exclaimed, 
with a wave of his hand, "don't know yah!" words cannot state the 
amount of aggravation and injury wreaked upon me by trabb's boy, 
when, passing abreast of me, he pulled up his shirt-collar, twined 
his side-hair, stuck an arm akimbo, and smirked extravagantly by, 
wriggling his elbows and body, and drawling to his attendants, 
"don't know yah, don't know yah, pon my soul don't know yah!" the 
disgrace attendant on his immediately afterwards taking to crowing 
and pursuing me across the bridge with crows, as from an 
exceedingly dejected fowl who had known me when i was a blacksmith, 
culminated the disgrace with which i left the town, and was, so to 
speak, ejected by it into the open country. 
but unless i had taken the life of trabb's boy on that occasion, i 
really do not even now see what i could have done save endure. to 
have struggled with him in the street, or to have exacted any lower 
recompense from him than his heart's best blood, would have been 
futile and degrading. moreover, he was a boy whom no man could 
hurt; an invulnerable and dodging serpent who, when chased into a 
corner, flew out again between his captor's legs, scornfully 
yelping. i wrote, however, to mr. trabb by next day's post, to say 
that mr. pip must decline to deal further with one who could so far 
forget what he owed to the best interests of society, as to employ 
a boy who excited loathing in every respectable mind. 
the coach, with mr. jaggers inside, came up in due time, and i took 
my box-seat again, and arrived in london safe - but not sound, for 
my heart was gone. as soon as i arrived, i sent a penitential 
codfish and barrel of oysters to joe (as reparation for not having 
gone myself), and then went on to barnard's inn. 
i found herbert dining on cold meat, and delighted to welcome me 
back. having despatched the avenger to the coffee-house for an 
addition to the dinner, i felt that i must open my breast that very 
evening to my friend and chum. as confidence was out of the 
question with the avenger in the hall, which could merely be 
regarded in the light of an ante-chamber to the keyhole, i sent him 
to the play. a better proof of the severity of my bondage to that 
taskmaster could scarcely be afforded, than the degrading shifts to 
which i was constantly driven to find him employment. so mean is 
extremity, that i sometimes sent him to hyde park corner to see 
what o'clock it was. 
dinner done and we sitting with our feet upon the fender, i said to 
herbert, "my dear herbert, i have something very particular to tell 
you." 
"my dear handel," he returned, "i shall esteem and respect your 
confidence." 
"it concerns myself, herbert," said i, "and one other person." 
herbert crossed his feet, looked at the fire with his head on one 
side, and having looked at it in vain for some time, looked at me 
because i didn't go on. 
"herbert," said i, laying my hand upon his knee, "i love - i adore 
estella." 
instead of being transfixed, herbert replied in an easy 
matter-of-course way, "exactly. well?" 
"well, herbert? is that all you say? well?" 
"what next, i mean?" said herbert. "of course i know that." 
"how do you know it?" said i. 
"how do i know it, handel? why, from you." 
"i never told you." 
"told me! you have never told me when you have got your hair cut, 
but i have had senses to perceive it. you have always adored her, 
ever since i have known you. you brought your adoration and your 
portmanteau here, together. told me! why, you have always told me 
all day long. when you told me your own story, you told me plainly 
that you began adoring her the first time you saw her, when you 
were very young indeed." 
"very well, then," said i, to whom this was a new and not unwelcome 
light, "i have never left off adoring her. and she has come back, a 
most beautiful and most elegant creature. and i saw her yesterday. 
and if i adored her before, i now doubly adore her." 
"lucky for you then, handel," said herbert, "that you are picked 
out for her and allotted to her. without encroaching on forbidden 
ground, we may venture to say that there can be no doubt between 
ourselves of that fact. have you any idea yet, of estella's views 
on the adoration question?" 
i shook my head gloomily. "oh! she is thousands of miles away, from 
me," said i. 
"patience, my dear handel: time enough, time enough. but you have 
something more to say?" 
"i am ashamed to say it," i returned, "and yet it's no worse to say 
it than to think it. you call me a lucky fellow. of course, i am. i 
was a blacksmith's boy but yesterday; i am - what shall i say i am 
to-day?" 
"say, a good fellow, if you want a phrase," returned herbert, 
smiling, and clapping his hand on the back of mine, "a good fellow, 
with impetuosity and hesitation, boldness and diffidence, action 
and dreaming, curiously mixed in him." 
i stopped for a moment to consider whether there really was this 
mixture in my character. on the whole, i by no means recognized the 
analysis, but thought it not worth disputing. 
"when i ask what i am to call myself to-day, herbert," i went on, 
"i suggest what i have in my thoughts. you say i am lucky. i know i 
have done nothing to raise myself in life, and that fortune alone 
has raised me; that is being very lucky. and yet, when i think of 
estella-" 
("and when don't you, you know?" herbert threw in, with his eyes on 
the fire; which i thought kind and sympathetic of him.) 
" - then, my dear herbert, i cannot tell you how dependent and 
uncertain i feel, and how exposed to hundreds of chances. avoiding 
forbidden ground, as you did just now, i may still say that on the 
constancy of one person (naming no person) all my expectations 
depend. and at the best, how indefinite and unsatisfactory, only to 
know so vaguely what they are!" in saying this, i relieved my mind 
of what had always been there, more or less, though no doubt most 
since yesterday. 
"now, handel," herbert replied, in his gay hopeful way, "it seems 
to me that in the despondency of the tender passion, we are looking 
into our gift-horse's mouth with a magnifying-glass. likewise, it 
seems to me that, concentrating our attention on the examination, 
we altogether overlook one of the best points of the animal. didn't 
you tell me that your guardian, mr. jaggers, told you in the 
beginning, that you were not endowed with expectations only? and 
even if he had not told you so - though that is a very large if, i 
grant - could you believe that of all men in london, mr. jaggers is 
the man to hold his present relations towards you unless he were 
sure of his ground?" 
i said i could not deny that this was a strong point. i said it 
(people often do so, in such cases) like a rather reluctant 
concession to truth and justice; - as if i wanted to deny it! 
"i should think it was a strong point," said herbert, "and i should 
think you would be puzzled to imagine a stronger; as to the rest, 
you must bide your guardian's time, and he must bide his client's 
time. you'll be one-and-twenty before you know where you are, and 
then perhaps you'll get some further enlightenment. at all events, 
you'll be nearer getting it, for it must come at last." 
"what a hopeful disposition you have!" said i, gratefully admiring 
his cheery ways. 
"i ought to have," said herbert, "for i have not much else. i must 
acknowledge, by-the-bye, that the good sense of what i have just 
said is not my own, but my father's. the only remark i ever heard 
him make on your story, was the final one: "the thing is settled 
and done, or mr. jaggers would not be in it." and now before i say 
anything more about my father, or my father's son, and repay 
confidence with confidence, i want to make myself seriously 
disagreeable to you for a moment - positively repulsive." 
"you won't succeed," said i. 
"oh yes i shall!" said he. "one, two, three, and now i am in for 
it. handel, my good fellow;" though he spoke in this light tone, he 
was very much in earnest: "i have been thinking since we have been 
talking with our feet on this fender, that estella surely cannot be 
a condition of your inheritance, if she was never referred to by 
your guardian. am i right in so understanding what you have told 
me, as that he never referred to her, directly or indirectly, in 
any way? never even hinted, for instance, that your patron might 
have views as to your marriage ultimately?" 
"never." 
"now, handel, i am quite free from the flavour of sour grapes, upon 
my soul and honour! not being bound to her, can you not detach 
yourself from her? - i told you i should be disagreeable." 
i turned my head aside, for, with a rush and a sweep, like the old 
marsh winds coming up from the sea, a feeling like that which had 
subdued me on the morning when i left the forge, when the mists 
were solemnly rising, and when i laid my hand upon the village 
finger-post, smote upon my heart again. there was silence between 
us for a little while. 
"yes; but my dear handel," herbert went on, as if we had been 
talking instead of silent, "its having been so strongly rooted in 
the breast of a boy whom nature and circumstances made so romantic, 
renders it very serious. think of her bringing-up, and think of 
miss havisham. think of what she is herself (now i am repulsive and 
you abominate me). this may lead to miserable things." 
"i know it, herbert," said i, with my head still turned away, "but 
i can't help it." 
"you can't detach yourself?" 
"no. impossible!" 
"you can't try, handel?" 
"no. impossible!" 
"well!" said herbert, getting up with a lively shake as if he had 
been asleep, and stirring the fire; "now i'll endeavour to make 
myself agreeable again!" 
so he went round the room and shook the curtains out, put the 
chairs in their places, tidied the books and so forth that were 
lying about, looked into the hall, peeped into the letter-box, shut 
the door, and came back to his chair by the fire: where he sat 
down, nursing his left leg in both arms. 
"i was going to say a word or two, handel, concerning my father and 
my father's son. i am afraid it is scarcely necessary for my 
father's son to remark that my father's establishment is not 
particularly brilliant in its housekeeping." 
"there is always plenty, herbert," said i: to say something 
encouraging. 
"oh yes! and so the dustman says, i believe, with the strongest 
approval, and so does the marine-store shop in the back street. 
gravely, handel, for the subject is grave enough, you know how it 
is, as well as i do. i suppose there was a time once when my father 
had not given matters up; but if ever there was, the time is gone. 
may i ask you if you have ever had an opportunity of remarking, 
down in your part of the country, that the children of not exactly 
suitable marriages, are always most particularly anxious to be 
married?" 
this was such a singular question, that i asked him in return, "is 
it so?" 
"i don't know," said herbert, "that's what i want to know. because 
it is decidedly the case with us. my poor sister charlotte who was 
next me and died before she was fourteen, was a striking example. 
little jane is the same. in her desire to be matrimonially 
established, you might suppose her to have passed her short 
existence in the perpetual contemplation of domestic bliss. little 
alick in a frock has already made arrangements for his union with a 
suitable young person at kew. and indeed, i think we are all 
engaged, except the baby." 
"then you are?" said i. 
"i am," said herbert; "but it's a secret." 
i assured him of my keeping the secret, and begged to be favoured 
with further particulars. he had spoken so sensibly and feelingly 
of my weakness that i wanted to know something about his strength. 
"may i ask the name?" i said. 
"name of clara," said herbert. 
"live in london?" 
"yes. perhaps i ought to mention," said herbert, who had become 
curiously crestfallen and meek, since we entered on the interesting 
theme, "that she is rather below my mother's nonsensical family 
notions. her father had to do with the victualling of 
passenger-ships. i think he was a species of purser." 
"what is he now?" said i. 
"he's an invalid now," replied herbert. 
"living on - ?" 
"on the first floor," said herbert. which was not at all what i 
meant, for i had intended my question to apply to his means. "i 
have never seen him, for he has always kept his room overhead, 
since i have known clara. but i have heard him constantly. he makes 
tremendous rows - roars, and pegs at the floor with some frightful 
instrument." in looking at me and then laughing heartily, herbert 
for the time recovered his usual lively manner. 
"don't you expect to see him?" said i. 
"oh yes, i constantly expect to see him," returned herbert, 
"because i never hear him, without expecting him to come tumbling 
through the ceiling. but i don't know how long the rafters may 
hold." 
when he had once more laughed heartily, he became meek again, and 
told me that the moment he began to realize capital, it was his 
intention to marry this young lady. he added as a self-evident 
proposition, engendering low spirits, "but you can't marry, you 
know, while you're looking about you." 
as we contemplated the fire, and as i thought what a difficult 
vision to realize this same capital sometimes was, i put my hands 
in my pockets. a folded piece of paper in one of them attracting my 
attention, i opened it and found it to be the playbill i had 
received from joe, relative to the celebrated provincial amateur of 
roscian renown. "and bless my heart," i involuntarily added aloud, 
"it's to-night!" 
this changed the subject in an instant, and made us hurriedly 
resolve to go to the play. so, when i had pledged myself to comfort 
and abet herbert in the affair of his heart by all practicable and 
impracticable means, and when herbert had told me that his 
affianced already knew me by reputation and that i should be 
presented to her, and when we had warmly shaken hands upon our 
mutual confidence, we blew out our candles, made up our fire, 
locked our door, and issued forth in quest of mr. wopsle and 
denmark. 
chapter 31 
on our arrival in denmark, we found the king and queen of that 
country elevated in two arm-chairs on a kitchen-table, holding a 
court. the whole of the danish nobility were in attendance; 
consisting of a noble boy in the wash-leather boots of a gigantic 
ancestor, a venerable peer with a dirty face who seemed to have 
risen from the people late in life, and the danish chivalry with a 
comb in its hair and a pair of white silk legs, and presenting on 
the whole a feminine appearance. my gifted townsman stood gloomily 
apart, with folded arms, and i could have wished that his curls and 
forehead had been more probable. 
several curious little circumstances transpired as the action 
proceeded. the late king of the country not only appeared to have 
been troubled with a cough at the time of his decease, but to have 
taken it with him to the tomb, and to have brought it back. the 
royal phantom also carried a ghostly manuscript round its 
truncheon, to which it had the appearance of occasionally 
referring, and that, too, with an air of anxiety and a tendency to 
lose the place of reference which were suggestive of a state of 
mortality. it was this, i conceive, which led to the shade's being 
advised by the gallery to "turn over!" - a recommendation which it 
took extremely ill. it was likewise to be noted of this majestic 
spirit that whereas it always appeared with an air of having been 
out a long time and walked an immense distance, it perceptibly came 
from a closely contiguous wall. this occasioned its terrors to be 
received derisively. the queen of denmark, a very buxom lady, 
though no doubt historically brazen, was considered by the public 
to have too much brass about her; her chin being attached to her 
diadem by a broad band of that metal (as if she had a gorgeous 
toothache), her waist being encircled by another, and each of her 
arms by another, so that she was openly mentioned as "the 
kettledrum." the noble boy in the ancestral boots, was 
inconsistent; representing himself, as it were in one breath, as an 
able seaman, a strolling actor, a grave-digger, a clergyman, and a 
person of the utmost importance at a court fencing-match, on the 
authority of whose practised eye and nice discrimination the finest 
strokes were judged. this gradually led to a want of toleration for 
him, and even - on his being detected in holy orders, and declining 
to perform the funeral service - to the general indignation taking 
the form of nuts. lastly, ophelia was a prey to such slow musical 
madness, that when, in course of time, she had taken off her white 
muslin scarf, folded it up, and buried it, a sulky man who had been 
long cooling his impatient nose against an iron bar in the front 
row of the gallery, growled, "now the baby's put to bed let's have 
supper!" which, to say the least of it, was out of keeping. 
upon my unfortunate townsman all these incidents accumulated with 
playful effect. whenever that undecided prince had to ask a 
question or state a doubt, the public helped him out with it. as 
for example; on the question whether 'twas nobler in the mind to 
suffer, some roared yes, and some no, and some inclining to both 
opinions said "toss up for it;" and quite a debating society arose. 
when he asked what should such fellows as he do crawling between 
earth and heaven, he was encouraged with loud cries of "hear, 
hear!" when he appeared with his stocking disordered (its disorder 
expressed, according to usage, by one very neat fold in the top, 
which i suppose to be always got up with a flat iron), a 
conversation took place in the gallery respecting the paleness of 
his leg, and whether it was occasioned by the turn the ghost had 
given him. on his taking the recorders - very like a little black 
flute that had just been played in the orchestra and handed out at 
the door - he was called upon unanimously for rule britannia. when 
he recommended the player not to saw the air thus, the sulky man 
said, "and don't you do it, neither; you're a deal worse than him!" 
and i grieve to add that peals of laughter greeted mr. wopsle on 
every one of these occasions. 
but his greatest trials were in the churchyard: which had the 
appearance of a primeval forest, with a kind of small 
ecclesiastical wash-house on one side, and a turnpike gate on the 
other. mr. wopsle in a comprehensive black cloak, being descried 
entering at the turnpike, the gravedigger was admonished in a 
friendly way, "look out! here's the undertaker a-coming, to see how 
you're a-getting on with your work!" i believe it is well known in 
a constitutional country that mr. wopsle could not possibly have 
returned the skull, after moralizing over it, without dusting his 
fingers on a white napkin taken from his breast; but even that 
innocent and indispensable action did not pass without the comment 
"wai-ter!" the arrival of the body for interment (in an empty black 
box with the lid tumbling open), was the signal for a general joy 
which was much enhanced by the discovery, among the bearers, of an 
individual obnoxious to identification. the joy attended mr. wopsle 
through his struggle with laertes on the brink of the orchestra and 
the grave, and slackened no more until he had tumbled the king off 
the kitchen-table, and had died by inches from the ankles upward. 
we had made some pale efforts in the beginning to applaud mr. 
wopsle; but they were too hopeless to be persisted in. therefore we 
had sat, feeling keenly for him, but laughing, nevertheless, from 
ear to ear. i laughed in spite of myself all the time, the whole 
thing was so droll; and yet i had a latent impression that there 
was something decidedly fine in mr. wopsle's elocution - not for old 
associations' sake, i am afraid, but because it was very slow, very 
dreary, very up-hill and down-hill, and very unlike any way in 
which any man in any natural circumstances of life or death ever 
expressed himself about anything. when the tragedy was over, and he 
had been called for and hooted, i said to herbert, "let us go at 
once, or perhaps we shall meet him." 
we made all the haste we could down-stairs, but we were not quick 
enough either. standing at the door was a jewish man with an 
unnatural heavy smear of eyebrow, who caught my eyes as we 
advanced, and said, when we came up with him: 
"mr. pip and friend?" 
identity of mr. pip and friend confessed. 
"mr. waldengarver," said the man, "would be glad to have the 
honour." 
"waldengarver?" i repeated - when herbert murmured in my ear, 
"probably wopsle." 
"oh!" said i. "yes. shall we follow you?" 
"a few steps, please." when we were in a side alley, he turned and 
asked, "how did you think he looked? - i dressed him." 
i don't know what he had looked like, except a funeral; with the 
addition of a large danish sun or star hanging round his neck by a 
blue ribbon, that had given him the appearance of being insured in 
some extraordinary fire office. but i said he had looked very nice. 
"when he come to the grave," said our conductor, "he showed his 
cloak beautiful. but, judging from the wing, it looked to me that 
when he see the ghost in the queen's apartment, he might have made 
more of his stockings." 
i modestly assented, and we all fell through a little dirty swing 
door, into a sort of hot packing-case immediately behind it. here 
mr. wopsle was divesting himself of his danish garments, and here 
there was just room for us to look at him over one another's 
shoulders, by keeping the packing-case door, or lid, wide open. 
"gentlemen," said mr. wopsle, "i am proud to see you. i hope, mr. 
pip, you will excuse my sending round. i had the happiness to know 
you in former times, and the drama has ever had a claim which has 
ever been acknowledged, on the noble and the affluent." 
meanwhile, mr. waldengarver, in a frightful perspiration, was trying 
to get himself out of his princely sables. 
"skin the stockings off, mr. waldengarver," said the owner of that 
property, "or you'll bust 'em. bust 'em, and you'll bust 
five-and-thirty shillings. shakspeare never was complimented with a 
finer pair. keep quiet in your chair now, and leave 'em to me." 
with that, he went upon his knees, and began to flay his victim; 
who, on the first stocking coming off, would certainly have fallen 
over backward with his chair, but for there being no room to fall 
anyhow. 
i had been afraid until then to say a word about the play. but 
then, mr. waldengarver looked up at us complacently, and said: 
"gentlemen, how did it seem to you, to go, in front?" 
herbert said from behind (at the same time poking me), "capitally." 
so i said "capitally." 
"how did you like my reading of the character, gentlemen?" said mr. 
waldengarver, almost, if not quite, with patronage. 
herbert said from behind (again poking me), "massive and concrete." 
so i said boldly, as if i had originated it, and must beg to insist 
upon it, "massive and concrete." 
"i am glad to have your approbation, gentlemen," said mr. 
waldengarver, with an air of dignity, in spite of his being ground 
against the wall at the time, and holding on by the seat of the 
chair. 
"but i'll tell you one thing, mr. waldengarver," said the man who 
was on his knees, "in which you're out in your reading. now mind! i 
don't care who says contrairy; i tell you so. you're out in your 
reading of hamlet when you get your legs in profile. the last 
hamlet as i dressed, made the same mistakes in his reading at 
rehearsal, till i got him to put a large red wafer on each of his 
shins, and then at that rehearsal (which was the last) i went in 
front, sir, to the back of the pit, and whenever his reading 
brought him into profile, i called out "i don't see no wafers!" and 
at night his reading was lovely." 
mr. waldengarver smiled at me, as much as to say "a faithful 
dependent - i overlook his folly;" and then said aloud, "my view is 
a little classic and thoughtful for them here; but they will 
improve, they will improve." 
herbert and i said together, oh, no doubt they would improve. 
"did you observe, gentlemen," said mr. waldengarver, "that there was 
a man in the gallery who endeavoured to cast derision on the 
service - i mean, the representation?" 
we basely replied that we rather thought we had noticed such a man. 
i added, "he was drunk, no doubt." 
"oh dear no, sir," said mr. wopsle, "not drunk. his employer would 
see to that, sir. his employer would not allow him to be drunk." 
"you know his employer?" said i. 
mr. wopsle shut his eyes, and opened them again; performing both 
ceremonies very slowly. "you must have observed, gentlemen," said 
he, "an ignorant and a blatant ass, with a rasping throat and a 
countenance expressive of low malignity, who went through - i will 
not say sustained - the role (if i may use a french expression) of 
claudius king of denmark. that is his employer, gentlemen. such is 
the profession!" 
without distinctly knowing whether i should have been more sorry 
for mr. wopsle if he had been in despair, i was so sorry for him as 
it was, that i took the opportunity of his turning round to have 
his braces put on - which jostled us out at the doorway - to ask 
herbert what he thought of having him home to supper? herbert said 
he thought it would be kind to do so; therefore i invited him, and 
he went to barnard's with us, wrapped up to the eyes, and we did 
our best for him, and he sat until two o'clock in the morning, 
reviewing his success and developing his plans. i forget in detail 
what they were, but i have a general recollection that he was to 
begin with reviving the drama, and to end with crushing it; 
inasmuch as his decease would leave it utterly bereft and without a 
chance or hope. 
miserably i went to bed after all, and miserably thought of 
estella, and miserably dreamed that my expectations were all 
cancelled, and that i had to give my hand in marriage to herbert's 
clara, or play hamlet to miss havisham's ghost, before twenty 
thousand people, without knowing twenty words of it. 
chapter 32 
one day when i was busy with my books and mr. pocket, i received a 
note by the post, the mere outside of which threw me into a great 
flutter; for, though i had never seen the handwriting in which it 
was addressed, i divined whose hand it was. it had no set 
beginning, as dear mr. pip, or dear pip, or dear sir, or dear 
anything, but ran thus: 
"i am to come to london the day after to-morrow by the mid-day 
coach. i believe it was settled you should meet me? at all events 
miss havisham has that impression, and i write in obedience to it. 
she sends you her regard. 
yours, estella." 
if there had been time, i should probably have ordered several 
suits of clothes for this occasion; but as there was not, i was 
fain to be content with those i had. my appetite vanished 
instantly, and i knew no peace or rest until the day arrived. not 
that its arrival brought me either; for, then i was worse than ever, 
and began haunting the coach-office in wood-street, cheapside, 
before the coach had left the blue boar in our town. for all that i 
knew this perfectly well, i still felt as if it were not safe to 
let the coach-office be out of my sight longer than five minutes at 
a time; and in this condition of unreason i had performed the first 
half-hour of a watch of four or five hours, when wemmick ran 
against me. 
"halloa, mr. pip," said he; "how do you do? i should hardly have 
thought this was your beat." 
i explained that i was waiting to meet somebody who was coming up 
by coach, and i inquired after the castle and the aged. 
"both flourishing thankye," said wemmick, "and particularly the 
aged. he's in wonderful feather. he'll be eighty-two next birthday. 
i have a notion of firing eighty-two times, if the neighbourhood 
shouldn't complain, and that cannon of mine should prove equal to 
the pressure. however, this is not london talk. where do you think 
i am going to?" 
"to the office?" said i, for he was tending in that direction. 
"next thing to it," returned wemmick, "i am going to newgate. we 
are in a banker's-parcel case just at present, and i have been down 
the road taking as squint at the scene of action, and thereupon 
must have a word or two with our client." 
"did your client commit the robbery?" i asked. 
"bless your soul and body, no," answered wemmick, very drily. "but 
he is accused of it. so might you or i be. either of us might be 
accused of it, you know." 
"only neither of us is," i remarked. 
"yah!" said wemmick, touching me on the breast with his forefinger; 
"you're a deep one, mr. pip! would you like to have a look at 
newgate? have you time to spare?" 
i had so much time to spare, that the proposal came as a relief, 
notwithstanding its irreconcilability with my latent desire to keep 
my eye on the coach-office. muttering that i would make the inquiry 
whether i had time to walk with him, i went into the office, and 
ascertained from the clerk with the nicest precision and much to 
the trying of his temper, the earliest moment at which the coach 
could be expected - which i knew beforehand, quite as well as he. i 
then rejoined mr. wemmick, and affecting to consult my watch and to 
be surprised by the information i had received, accepted his offer. 
we were at newgate in a few minutes, and we passed through the 
lodge where some fetters were hanging up on the bare walls among 
the prison rules, into the interior of the jail. at that time, 
jails were much neglected, and the period of exaggerated reaction 
consequent on all public wrong-doing - and which is always its 
heaviest and longest punishment - was still far off. so, felons 
were not lodged and fed better than soldiers (to say nothing of 
paupers), and seldom set fire to their prisons with the excusable 
object of improving the flavour of their soup. it was visiting time 
when wemmick took me in; and a potman was going his rounds with 
beer; and the prisoners, behind bars in yards, were buying beer, 
and talking to friends; and a frouzy, ugly, disorderly, depressing 
scene it was. 
it struck me that wemmick walked among the prisoners, much as a 
gardener might walk among his plants. this was first put into my 
head by his seeing a shoot that had come up in the night, and 
saying, "what, captain tom? are you there? ah, indeed!" and also, 
"is that black bill behind the cistern? why i didn't look for you 
these two months; how do you find yourself?" equally in his 
stopping at the bars and attending to anxious whisperers - always 
singly - wemmick with his post-office in an immovable state, looked 
at them while in conference, as if he were taking particular notice 
of the advance they had made, since last observed, towards coming 
out in full blow at their trial. 
he was highly popular, and i found that he took the familiar 
department of mr. jaggers's business: though something of the state 
of mr. jaggers hung about him too, forbidding approach beyond 
certain limits. his personal recognition of each successive client 
was comprised in a nod, and in his settling his hat a little easier 
on his head with both hands, and then tightening the postoffice, 
and putting his hands in his pockets. in one or two instances, 
there was a difficulty respecting the raising of fees, and then mr. 
wemmick, backing as far as possible from the insufficient money 
produced, said, "it's no use, my boy. i'm only a subordinate. i 
can't take it. don't go on in that way with a subordinate. if you 
are unable to make up your quantum, my boy, you had better address 
yourself to a principal; there are plenty of principals in the 
profession, you know, and what is not worth the while of one, may 
be worth the while of another; that's my recommendation to you, 
speaking as a subordinate. don't try on useless measures. why 
should you? now, who's next?" 
thus, we walked through wemmick's greenhouse, until he turned to me 
and said, "notice the man i shall shake hands with." i should have 
done so, without the preparation, as he had shaken hands with no 
one yet. 
almost as soon as he had spoken, a portly upright man (whom i can 
see now, as i write) in a well-worn olive-coloured frock-coat, with 
a peculiar pallor over-spreading the red in his complexion, and 
eyes that went wandering about when he tried to fix them, came up 
to a corner of the bars, and put his hand to his hat - which had a 
greasy and fatty surface like cold broth - with a half-serious and 
half-jocose military salute. 
"colonel, to you!" said wemmick; "how are you, colonel?" 
"all right, mr. wemmick." 
"everything was done that could be done, but the evidence was too 
strong for us, colonel." 
"yes, it was too strong, sir - but i don't care." 
"no, no," said wemmick, coolly, "you don't care." then, turning to 
me, "served his majesty this man. was a soldier in the line and 
bought his discharge." 
i said, "indeed?" and the man's eyes looked at me, and then looked 
over my head, and then looked all round me, and then he drew his 
hand across his lips and laughed. 
"i think i shall be out of this on monday, sir," he said to 
wemmick. 
"perhaps," returned my friend, "but there's no knowing." 
"i am glad to have the chance of bidding you good-bye, mr. wemmick," 
said the man, stretching out his hand between two bars. 
"thankye," said wemmick, shaking hands with him. "same to you, 
colonel." 
"if what i had upon me when taken, had been real, mr. wemmick," said 
the man, unwilling to let his hand go, "i should have asked the 
favour of your wearing another ring - in acknowledgment of your 
attentions." 
"i'll accept the will for the deed," said wemmick. "by-the-bye; you 
were quite a pigeon-fancier." the man looked up at the sky. "i am 
told you had a remarkable breed of tumblers. could you commission 
any friend of yours to bring me a pair, of you've no further use 
for 'em?" 
"it shall be done, sir?" 
"all right," said wemmick, "they shall be taken care of. good 
afternoon, colonel. good-bye!" they shook hands again, and as we 
walked away wemmick said to me, "a coiner, a very good workman. the 
recorder's report is made to-day, and he is sure to be executed on 
monday. still you see, as far as it goes, a pair of pigeons are 
portable property, all the same." with that, he looked back, and 
nodded at this dead plant, and then cast his eyes about him in 
walking out of the yard, as if he were considering what other pot 
would go best in its place. 
as we came out of the prison through the lodge, i found that the 
great importance of my guardian was appreciated by the turnkeys, no 
less than by those whom they held in charge. "well, mr. wemmick," 
said the turnkey, who kept us between the two studded and spiked 
lodge gates, and who carefully locked one before he unlocked the 
other, "what's mr. jaggers going to do with that waterside murder? 
is he going to make it manslaughter, or what's he going to make of 
it?" 
"why don't you ask him?" returned wemmick. 
"oh yes, i dare say!" said the turnkey. 
"now, that's the way with them here. mr. pip," remarked wemmick, 
turning to me with his post-office elongated. "they don't mind what 
they ask of me, the subordinate; but you'll never catch 'em asking 
any questions of my principal." 
"is this young gentleman one of the 'prentices or articled ones of 
your office?" asked the turnkey, with a grin at mr. wemmick's 
humour. 
"there he goes again, you see!" cried wemmick, "i told you so! asks 
another question of the subordinate before his first is dry! well, 
supposing mr. pip is one of them?" 
"why then," said the turnkey, grinning again, "he knows what mr. 
jaggers is." 
"yah!" cried wemmick, suddenly hitting out at the turnkey in a 
facetious way, "you're dumb as one of your own keys when you have 
to do with my principal, you know you are. let us out, you old fox, 
or i'll get him to bring an action against you for false 
imprisonment." 
the turnkey laughed, and gave us good day, and stood laughing at us 
over the spikes of the wicket when we descended the steps into the 
street. 
"mind you, mr. pip," said wemmick, gravely in my ear, as he took my 
arm to be more confidential; "i don't know that mr. jaggers does a 
better thing than the way in which he keeps himself so high. he's 
always so high. his constant height is of a piece with his immense 
abilities. that colonel durst no more take leave of him, than that 
turnkey durst ask him his intentions respecting a case. then, 
between his height and them, he slips in his subordinate - don't 
you see? - and so he has 'em, soul and body." 
i was very much impressed, and not for the first time, by my 
guardian's subtlety. to confess the truth, i very heartily wished, 
and not for the first time, that i had had some other guardian of 
minor abilities. 
mr. wemmick and i parted at the office in little britain, where 
suppliants for mr. jaggers's notice were lingering about as usual, 
and i returned to my watch in the street of the coach-office, with 
some three hours on hand. i consumed the whole time in thinking how 
strange it was that i should be encompassed by all this taint of 
prison and crime; that, in my childhood out on our lonely marshes 
on a winter evening i should have first encountered it; that, it 
should have reappeared on two occasions, starting out like a stain 
that was faded but not gone; that, it should in this new way 
pervade my fortune and advancement. while my mind was thus engaged, 
i thought of the beautiful young estella, proud and refined, coming 
towards me, and i thought with absolute abhorrence of the contrast 
between the jail and her. i wished that wemmick had not met me, or 
that i had not yielded to him and gone with him, so that, of all 
days in the year on this day, i might not have had newgate in my 
breath and on my clothes. i beat the prison dust off my feet as i 
sauntered to and fro, and i shook it out of my dress, and i exhaled 
its air from my lungs. so contaminated did i feel, remembering who 
was coming, that the coach came quickly after all, and i was not 
yet free from the soiling consciousness of mr. wemmick's 
conservatory, when i saw her face at the coach window and her hand 
waving to me. 
what was the nameless shadow which again in that one instant had 
passed? 
chapter 33 
in her furred travelling-dress, estella seemed more delicately 
beautiful than she had ever seemed yet, even in my eyes. her manner 
was more winning than she had cared to let it be to me before, and 
i thought i saw miss havisham's influence in the change. 
we stood in the inn yard while she pointed out her luggage to me, 
and when it was all collected i remembered - having forgotten 
everything but herself in the meanwhile - that i knew nothing of 
her destination. 
"i am going to richmond," she told me. "our lesson is, that there 
are two richmonds, one in surrey and one in yorkshire, and that mine 
is the surrey richmond. the distance is ten miles. i am to have a 
carriage, and you are to take me. this is my purse, and you are to 
pay my charges out of it. oh, you must take the purse! we have no 
choice, you and i, but to obey our instructions. we are not free to 
follow our own devices, you and i." 
as she looked at me in giving me the purse, i hoped there was an 
inner meaning in her words. she said them slightingly, but not with 
displeasure. 
"a carriage will have to be sent for, estella. will you rest here a 
little?" 
"yes, i am to rest here a little, and i am to drink some tea, and 
you are to take care of me the while." 
she drew her arm through mine, as if it must be done, and i 
requested a waiter who had been staring at the coach like a man who 
had never seen such a thing in his life, to show us a private 
sitting-room. upon that, he pulled out a napkin, as if it were a 
magic clue without which he couldn't find the way up-stairs, and 
led us to the black hole of the establishment: fitted up with a 
diminishing mirror (quite a superfluous article considering the 
hole's proportions), an anchovy sauce-cruet, and somebody's 
pattens. on my objecting to this retreat, he took us into another 
room with a dinner-table for thirty, and in the grate a scorched 
leaf of a copy-book under a bushel of coal-dust. having looked at 
this extinct conflagration and shaken his head, he took my order: 
which, proving to be merely "some tea for the lady," sent him out 
of the room in a very low state of mind. 
i was, and i am, sensible that the air of this chamber, in its 
strong combination of stable with soup-stock, might have led one to 
infer that the coaching department was not doing well, and that the 
enterprising proprietor was boiling down the horses for the 
refreshment department. yet the room was all in all to me, estella 
being in it. i thought that with her i could have been happy there 
for life. (i was not at all happy there at the time, observe, and i 
knew it well.) 
"where are you going to, at richmond?" i asked estella. 
"i am going to live," said she, "at a great expense, with a lady 
there, who has the power - or says she has - of taking me about, 
and introducing me, and showing people to me and showing me to 
people." 
"i suppose you will be glad of variety and admiration?" 
"yes, i suppose so." 
she answered so carelessly, that i said, "you speak of yourself as 
if you were some one else." 
"where did you learn how i speak of others? come, come," said 
estella, smiling delightfully, "you must not expect me to go to 
school to you; i must talk in my own way. how do you thrive with 
mr. pocket?" 
"i live quite pleasantly there; at least-" it appeared to me that 
i was losing a chance. 
"at least?" repeated estella. 
"as pleasantly as i could anywhere, away from you." 
"you silly boy," said estella, quite composedly, "how can you talk 
such nonsense? your friend mr. matthew, i believe, is superior to 
the rest of his family?" 
"very superior indeed. he is nobody's enemy-" 
"don't add but his own," interposed estella, "for i hate that class 
of man. but he really is disinterested, and above small jealousy 
and spite, i have heard?" 
"i am sure i have every reason to say so." 
"you have not every reason to say so of the rest of his people," 
said estella, nodding at me with an expression of face that was at 
once grave and rallying, "for they beset miss havisham with reports 
and insinuations to your disadvantage. they watch you, misrepresent 
you, write letters about you (anonymous sometimes), and you are the 
torment and the occupation of their lives. you can scarcely realize 
to yourself the hatred those people feel for you." 
"they do me no harm, i hope?" 
instead of answering, estella burst out laughing. this was very 
singular to me, and i looked at her in considerable perplexity. 
when she left off - and she had not laughed languidly, but with 
real enjoyment - i said, in my diffident way with her: 
"i hope i may suppose that you would not be amused if they did me 
any harm." 
"no, no you may be sure of that," said estella. "you may be certain 
that i laugh because they fail. oh, those people with miss 
havisham, and the tortures they undergo!" she laughed again, and 
even now when she had told me why, her laughter was very singular 
to me, for i could not doubt its being genuine, and yet it seemed 
too much for the occasion. i thought there must really be something 
more here than i knew; she saw the thought in my mind, and answered 
it. 
"it is not easy for even you." said estella, "to know what 
satisfaction it gives me to see those people thwarted, or what an 
enjoyable sense of the ridiculous i have when they are made 
ridiculous. for you were not brought up in that strange house from 
a mere baby. - i was. you had not your little wits sharpened by 
their intriguing against you, suppressed and defenceless, under the 
mask of sympathy and pity and what not that is soft and soothing. - 
i had. you did not gradually open your round childish eyes wider 
and wider to the discovery of that impostor of a woman who 
calculates her stores of peace of mind for when she wakes up in the 
night. - i did." 
it was no laughing matter with estella now, nor was she summoning 
these remembrances from any shallow place. i would not have been 
the cause of that look of hers, for all my expectations in a heap. 
"two things i can tell you," said estella. "first, notwithstanding 
the proverb that constant dropping will wear away a stone, you may 
set your mind at rest that these people never will - never would, 
in hundred years - impair your ground with miss havisham, in any 
particular, great or small. second, i am beholden to you as the 
cause of their being so busy and so mean in vain, and there is my 
hand upon it." 
as she gave it me playfully - for her darker mood had been but 
momentary - i held it and put it to my lips. "you ridiculous boy," 
said estella, "will you never take warning? or do you kiss my hand 
in the same spirit in which i once let you kiss my cheek?" 
"what spirit was that?" said i. 
"i must think a moment a spirit of contempt for the fawners and 
plotters." 
"if i say yes, may i kiss the cheek again?" 
"you should have asked before you touched the hand. but, yes, if 
you like." 
i leaned down, and her calm face was like a statue's. "now," said 
estella, gliding away the instant i touched her cheek, "you are to 
take care that i have some tea, and you are to take me to 
richmond." 
her reverting to this tone as if our association were forced upon 
us and we were mere puppets, gave me pain; but everything in our 
intercourse did give me pain. whatever her tone with me happened to 
be, i could put no trust in it, and build no hope on it; and yet i 
went on against trust and against hope. why repeat it a thousand 
times? so it always was. 
i rang for the tea, and the waiter, reappearing with his magic 
clue, brought in by degrees some fifty adjuncts to that refreshment 
but of tea not a glimpse. a teaboard, cups and saucers, plates, 
knives and forks (including carvers), spoons (various), 
saltcellars, a meek little muffin confined with the utmost 
precaution under a strong iron cover, moses in the bullrushes 
typified by a soft bit of butter in a quantity of parsley, a pale 
loaf with a powdered head, two proof impressions of the bars of the 
kitchen fire-place on triangular bits of bread, and ultimately a 
fat family urn: which the waiter staggered in with, expressing in 
his countenance burden and suffering. after a prolonged absence at 
this stage of the entertainment, he at length came back with a 
casket of precious appearance containing twigs. these i steeped in 
hot water, and so from the whole of these appliances extracted one 
cup of i don't know what, for estella. 
the bill paid, and the waiter remembered, and the ostler not 
forgotten, and the chambermaid taken into consideration - in a 
word, the whole house bribed into a state of contempt and 
animosity, and estella's purse much lightened - we got into our 
post-coach and drove away. turning into cheapside and rattling up 
newgate-street, we were soon under the walls of which i was so 
ashamed. 
"what place is that?" estella asked me. 
i made a foolish pretence of not at first recognizing it, and then 
told her. as she looked at it, and drew in her head again, 
murmuring "wretches!" i would not have confessed to my visit for 
any consideration. 
"mr. jaggers," said i, by way of putting it neatly on somebody else, 
"has the reputation of being more in the secrets of that dismal 
place than any man in london." 
"he is more in the secrets of every place, i think," said estella, 
in a low voice. 
"you have been accustomed to see him often, i suppose?" 
"i have been accustomed to see him at uncertain intervals, ever 
since i can remember. but i know him no better now, than i did 
before i could speak plainly. what is your own experience of him? 
do you advance with him?" 
"once habituated to his distrustful manner," said i, "i have done 
very well." 
"are you intimate?" 
"i have dined with him at his private house." 
"i fancy," said estella, shrinking "that must be a curious place." 
"it is a curious place." 
i should have been chary of discussing my guardian too freely even 
with her; but i should have gone on with the subject so far as to 
describe the dinner in gerrard-street, if we had not then come into 
a sudden glare of gas. it seemed, while it lasted, to be all alight 
and alive with that inexplicable feeling i had had before; and when 
we were out of it, i was as much dazed for a few moments as if i 
had been in lightning. 
so, we fell into other talk, and it was principally about the way 
by which we were travelling, and about what parts of london lay on 
this side of it, and what on that. the great city was almost new to 
her, she told me, for she had never left miss havisham's 
neighbourhood until she had gone to france, and she had merely 
passed through london then in going and returning. i asked her if 
my guardian had any charge of her while she remained here? to that 
she emphatically said "god forbid!" and no more. 
it was impossible for me to avoid seeing that she cared to attract 
me; that she made herself winning; and would have won me even if 
the task had needed pains. yet this made me none the happier, for, 
even if she had not taken that tone of our being disposed of by 
others, i should have felt that she held my heart in her hand 
because she wilfully chose to do it, and not because it would have 
wrung any tenderness in her, to crush it and throw it away. 
when we passed through hammersmith, i showed her where mr. matthew 
pocket lived, and said it was no great way from richmond, and that 
i hoped i should see her sometimes. 
"oh yes, you are to see me; you are to come when you think proper; 
you are to be mentioned to the family; indeed you are already 
mentioned." 
i inquired was it a large household she was going to be a member 
of? 
"no; there are only two; mother and daughter. the mother is a lady 
of some station, though not averse to increasing her income." 
"i wonder miss havisham could part with you again so soon." 
"it is a part of miss havisham's plans for me, pip," said estella, 
with a sigh, as if she were tired; "i am to write to her constantly 
and see her regularly and report how i go on - i and the jewels - 
for they are nearly all mine now." 
it was the first time she had ever called me by my name. of course 
she did so, purposely, and knew that i should treasure it up. 
we came to richmond all too soon, and our destination there, was a 
house by the green; a staid old house, where hoops and powder and 
patches, embroidered coats rolled stockings ruffles and swords, had 
had their court days many a time. some ancient trees before the 
house were still cut into fashions as formal and unnatural as the 
hoops and wigs and stiff skirts; but their own allotted places in 
the great procession of the dead were not far off, and they would 
soon drop into them and go the silent way of the rest. 
a bell with an old voice - which i dare say in its time had often 
said to the house, here is the green farthingale, here is the 
diamondhilted sword, here are the shoes with red heels and the blue 
solitaire, - sounded gravely in the moonlight, and two 
cherrycoloured maids came fluttering out to receive estella. the 
doorway soon absorbed her boxes, and she gave me her hand and a 
smile, and said good night, and was absorbed likewise. and still i 
stood looking at the house, thinking how happy i should be if i 
lived there with her, and knowing that i never was happy with her, 
but always miserable. 
i got into the carriage to be taken back to hammersmith, and i got 
in with a bad heart-ache, and i got out with a worse heart-ache. at 
our own door, i found little jane pocket coming home from a little 
party escorted by her little lover; and i envied her little lover, 
in spite of his being subject to flopson. 
mr. pocket was out lecturing; for, he was a most delightful lecturer 
on domestic economy, and his treatises on the management of 
children and servants were considered the very best text-books on 
those themes. but, mrs. pocket was at home, and was in a little 
difficulty, on account of the baby's having been accommodated with 
a needle-case to keep him quiet during the unaccountable absence 
(with a relative in the foot guards) of millers. and more needles 
were missing, than it could be regarded as quite wholesome for a 
patient of such tender years either to apply externally or to take 
as a tonic. 
mr. pocket being justly celebrated for giving most excellent 
practical advice, and for having a clear and sound perception of 
things and a highly judicious mind, i had some notion in my 
heartache of begging him to accept my confidence. but, happening to 
look up at mrs. pocket as she sat reading her book of dignities 
after prescribing bed as a sovereign remedy for baby, i thought - 
well - no, i wouldn't. 
chapter 34 
as i had grown accustomed to my expectations, i had insensibly 
begun to notice their effect upon myself and those around me. their 
influence on my own character, i disguised from my recognition as 
much as possible, but i knew very well that it was not all good. i 
lived in a state of chronic uneasiness respecting my behaviour to 
joe. my conscience was not by any means comfortable about biddy. 
when i woke up in the night - like camilla - i used to think, with 
a weariness on my spirits, that i should have been happier and 
better if i had never seen miss havisham's face, and had risen to 
manhood content to be partners with joe in the honest old forge. 
many a time of an evening, when i sat alone looking at the fire, i 
thought, after all, there was no fire like the forge fire and the 
kitchen fire at home. 
yet estella was so inseparable from all my restlessness and 
disquiet of mind, that i really fell into confusion as to the 
limits of my own part in its production. that is to say, supposing 
i had had no expectations, and yet had had estella to think of, i 
could not make out to my satisfaction that i should have done much 
better. now, concerning the influence of my position on others, i 
was in no such difficulty, and so i perceived - though dimly enough 
perhaps - that it was not beneficial to anybody, and, above all, 
that it was not beneficial to herbert. my lavish habits led his 
easy nature into expenses that he could not afford, corrupted the 
simplicity of his life, and disturbed his peace with anxieties and 
regrets. i was not at all remorseful for having unwittingly set 
those other branches of the pocket family to the poor arts they 
practised: because such littlenesses were their natural bent, and 
would have been evoked by anybody else, if i had left them 
slumbering. but herbert's was a very different case, and it often 
caused me a twinge to think that i had done him evil service in 
crowding his sparely-furnished chambers with incongruous upholstery 
work, and placing the canary-breasted avenger at his disposal. 
so now, as an infallible way of making little ease great ease, i 
began to contract a quantity of debt. i could hardly begin but 
herbert must begin too, so he soon followed. at startop's 
suggestion, we put ourselves down for election into a club called 
the finches of the grove: the object of which institution i have 
never divined, if it were not that the members should dine 
expensively once a fortnight, to quarrel among themselves as much 
as possible after dinner, and to cause six waiters to get drunk on 
the stairs. i know that these gratifying social ends were so 
invariably accomplished, that herbert and i understood nothing else 
to be referred to in the first standing toast of the society: which 
ran "gentlemen, may the present promotion of good feeling ever 
reign predominant among the finches of the grove." 
the finches spent their money foolishly (the hotel we dined at was 
in covent-garden), and the first finch i saw, when i had the honour 
of joining the grove, was bentley drummle: at that time floundering 
about town in a cab of his own, and doing a great deal of damage to 
the posts at the street corners. occasionally, he shot himself out 
of his equipage head-foremost over the apron; and i saw him on one 
occasion deliver himself at the door of the grove in this 
unintentional way - like coals. but here i anticipate a little for 
i was not a finch, and could not be, according to the sacred laws 
of the society, until i came of age. 
in my confidence in my own resources, i would willingly have taken 
herbert's expenses on myself; but herbert was proud, and i could 
make no such proposal to him. so, he got into difficulties in every 
direction, and continued to look about him. when we gradually fell 
into keeping late hours and late company, i noticed that he looked 
about him with a desponding eye at breakfast-time; that he began to 
look about him more hopefully about mid-day; that he drooped when 
he came into dinner; that he seemed to descry capital in the 
distance rather clearly, after dinner; that he all but realized 
capital towards midnight; and that at about two o'clock in the 
morning, he became so deeply despondent again as to talk of buying 
a rifle and going to america, with a general purpose of compelling 
buffaloes to make his fortune. 
i was usually at hammersmith about half the week, and when i was at 
hammersmith i haunted richmond: whereof separately by-and-by. 
herbert would often come to hammersmith when i was there, and i 
think at those seasons his father would occasionally have some 
passing perception that the opening he was looking for, had not 
appeared yet. but in the general tumbling up of the family, his 
tumbling out in life somewhere, was a thing to transact itself 
somehow. in the meantime mr. pocket grew greyer, and tried oftener 
to lift himself out of his perplexities by the hair. while mrs. 
pocket tripped up the family with her footstool, read her book of 
dignities, lost her pocket-handkerchief, told us about her 
grandpapa, and taught the young idea how to shoot, by shooting it 
into bed whenever it attracted her notice. 
as i am now generalizing a period of my life with the object of 
clearing my way before me, i can scarcely do so better than by at 
once completing the description of our usual manners and customs at 
barnard's inn. 
we spent as much money as we could, and got as little for it as 
people could make up their minds to give us. we were always more or 
less miserable, and most of our acquaintance were in the same 
condition. there was a gay fiction among us that we were constantly 
enjoying ourselves, and a skeleton truth that we never did. to the 
best of my belief, our case was in the last aspect a rather common 
one. 
every morning, with an air ever new, herbert went into the city to 
look about him. i often paid him a visit in the dark back-room in 
which he consorted with an ink-jar, a hat-peg, a coal-box, a 
string-box, an almanack, a desk and stool, and a ruler; and i do 
not remember that i ever saw him do anything else but look about 
him. if we all did what we undertake to do, as faithfully as 
herbert did, we might live in a republic of the virtues. he had 
nothing else to do, poor fellow, except at a certain hour of every 
afternoon to "go to lloyd's" - in observance of a ceremony of 
seeing his principal, i think. he never did anything else in 
connexion with lloyd's that i could find out, except come back 
again. when he felt his case unusually serious, and that he 
positively must find an opening, he would go on 'change at a busy 
time, and walk in and out, in a kind of gloomy country dance 
figure, among the assembled magnates. "for," says herbert to me, 
coming home to dinner on one of those special occasions, "i find 
the truth to be, handel, that an opening won't come to one, but one 
must go to it - so i have been." 
if we had been less attached to one another, i think we must have 
hated one another regularly every morning. i detested the chambers 
beyond expression at that period of repentance, and could not 
endure the sight of the avenger's livery: which had a more 
expensive and a less remunerative appearance then, than at any 
other time in the four-and-twenty hours. as we got more and more 
into debt breakfast became a hollower and hollower form, and, being 
on one occasion at breakfast-time threatened (by letter) with legal 
proceedings, "not unwholly unconnected," as my local paper might 
put it, "with jewellery," i went so far as to seize the avenger by 
his blue collar and shake him off his feet - so that he was 
actually in the air, like a booted cupid - for presuming to suppose 
that we wanted a roll. 
at certain times - meaning at uncertain times, for they depended on 
our humour - i would say to herbert, as if it were a remarkable 
discovery: 
"my dear herbert, we are getting on badly." 
"my dear handel," herbert would say to me, in all sincerity, if you 
will believe me, those very words were on my lips, by a strange 
coincidence." 
"then, herbert," i would respond, "let us look into out affairs." 
we always derived profound satisfaction from making an appointment 
for this purpose. i always thought this was business, this was the 
way to confront the thing, this was the way to take the foe by the 
throat. and i know herbert thought so too. 
we ordered something rather special for dinner, with a bottle of 
something similarly out of the common way, in order that our minds 
might be fortified for the occasion, and we might come well up to 
the mark. dinner over, we produced a bundle of pens, a copious 
supply of ink, and a goodly show of writing and blotting paper. 
for, there was something very comfortable in having plenty of 
stationery. 
i would then take a sheet of paper, and write across the top of it, 
in a neat hand, the heading, "memorandum of pip's debts;" with 
barnard's inn and the date very carefully added. herbert would also 
take a sheet of paper, and write across it with similar 
formalities, "memorandum of herbert's debts." 
each of us would then refer to a confused heap of papers at his 
side, which had been thrown into drawers, worn into holes in 
pockets, half-burnt in lighting candles, stuck for weeks into the 
looking-glass, and otherwise damaged. the sound of our pens going, 
refreshed us exceedingly, insomuch that i sometimes found it 
difficult to distinguish between this edifying business proceeding 
and actually paying the money. in point of meritorious character, 
the two things seemed about equal. 
when we had written a little while, i would ask herbert how he got 
on? herbert probably would have been scratching his head in a most 
rueful manner at the sight of his accumulating figures. 
"they are mounting up, handel," herbert would say; "upon my life, 
they are mounting up." 
"be firm, herbert," i would retort, plying my own pen with great 
assiduity. "look the thing in the face. look into your affairs. 
stare them out of countenance." 
"so i would, handel, only they are staring me out of countenance." 
however, my determined manner would have its effect, and herbert 
would fall to work again. after a time he would give up once more, 
on the plea that he had not got cobbs's bill, or lobbs's, or 
nobbs's, as the case might be. 
"then, herbert, estimate; estimate it in round numbers, and put it 
down." 
"what a fellow of resource you are!" my friend would reply, with 
admiration. "really your business powers are very remarkable." 
i thought so too. i established with myself on these occasions, the 
reputation of a first-rate man of business - prompt, decisive, 
energetic, clear, cool-headed. when i had got all my 
responsibilities down upon my list, i compared each with the bill, 
and ticked it off. my self-approval when i ticked an entry was 
quite a luxurious sensation. when i had no more ticks to make, i 
folded all my bills up uniformly, docketed each on the back, and 
tied the whole into a symmetrical bundle. then i did the same for 
herbert (who modestly said he had not my administrative genius), 
and felt that i had brought his affairs into a focus for him. 
my business habits had one other bright feature, which i called 
"leaving a margin." for example; supposing herbert's debts to be 
one hundred and sixty-four pounds four-and-twopence, i would say, 
"leave a margin, and put them down at two hundred." or, supposing 
my own to be four times as much, i would leave a margin, and put 
them down at seven hundred. i had the highest opinion of the wisdom 
of this same margin, but i am bound to acknowledge that on looking 
back, i deem it to have been an expensive device. for, we always 
ran into new debt immediately, to the full extent of the margin, 
and sometimes, in the sense of freedom and solvency it imparted, 
got pretty far on into another margin. 
but there was a calm, a rest, a virtuous hush, consequent on these 
examinations of our affairs that gave me, for the time, an 
admirable opinion of myself. soothed by my exertions, my method, 
and herbert's compliments, i would sit with his symmetrical bundle 
and my own on the table before me among the stationary, and feel 
like a bank of some sort, rather than a private individual. 
we shut our outer door on these solemn occasions, in order that we 
might not be interrupted. i had fallen into my serene state one 
evening, when we heard a letter dropped through the slit in the 
said door, and fall on the ground. "it's for you, handel," said 
herbert, going out and coming back with it, "and i hope there is 
nothing the matter." this was in allusion to its heavy black seal 
and border. 
the letter was signed trabb & co., and its contents were simply, 
that i was an honoured sir, and that they begged to inform me that 
mrs. j. gargery had departed this life on monday last, at twenty 
minutes past six in the evening, and that my attendance was 
requested at the interment on monday next at three o'clock in the 
afternoon. 
chapter 35 
it was the first time that a grave had opened in my road of life, 
and the gap it made in the smooth ground was wonderful. the figure 
of my sister in her chair by the kitchen fire, haunted me night and 
day. that the place could possibly be, without her, was something 
my mind seemed unable to compass; and whereas she had seldom or 
never been in my thoughts of late, i had now the strangest ideas 
that she was coming towards me in the street, or that she would 
presently knock at the door. in my rooms too, with which she had 
never been at all associated, there was at once the blankness of 
death and a perpetual suggestion of the sound of her voice or the 
turn of her face or figure, as if she were still alive and had been 
often there. 
whatever my fortunes might have been, i could scarcely have 
recalled my sister with much tenderness. but i suppose there is a 
shock of regret which may exist without much tenderness. under its 
influence (and perhaps to make up for the want of the softer 
feeling) i was seized with a violent indignation against the 
assailant from whom she had suffered so much; and i felt that on 
sufficient proof i could have revengefully pursued orlick, or any 
one else, to the last extremity. 
having written to joe, to offer consolation, and to assure him that 
i should come to the funeral, i passed the intermediate days in the 
curious state of mind i have glanced at. i went down early in the 
morning, and alighted at the blue boar in good time to walk over to 
the forge. 
it was fine summer weather again, and, as i walked along, the times 
when i was a little helpless creature, and my sister did not spare 
me, vividly returned. but they returned with a gentle tone upon 
them that softened even the edge of tickler. for now, the very 
breath of the beans and clover whispered to my heart that the day 
must come when it would be well for my memory that others walking 
in the sunshine should be softened as they thought of me. 
at last i came within sight of the house, and saw that trabb and 
co. had put in a funereal execution and taken possession. two 
dismally absurd persons, each ostentatiously exhibiting a crutch 
done up in a black bandage - as if that instrument could possibly 
communicate any comfort to anybody - were posted at the front door; 
and in one of them i recognized a postboy discharged from the boar 
for turning a young couple into a sawpit on their bridal morning, 
in consequence of intoxication rendering it necessary for him to 
ride his horse clasped round the neck with both arms. all the 
children of the village, and most of the women, were admiring these 
sable warders and the closed windows of the house and forge; and as 
i came up, one of the two warders (the postboy) knocked at the door 
implying that i was far too much exhausted by grief, to have 
strength remaining to knock for myself. 
another sable warder (a carpenter, who had once eaten two geese for 
a wager) opened the door, and showed me into the best parlour. 
here, mr. trabb had taken unto himself the best table, and had got 
all the leaves up, and was holding a kind of black bazaar, with the 
aid of a quantity of black pins. at the moment of my arrival, he 
had just finished putting somebody's hat into black long-clothes, 
like an african baby; so he held out his hand for mine. but i, 
misled by the action, and confused by the occasion, shook hands 
with him with every testimony of warm affection. 
poor dear joe, entangled in a little black cloak tied in a large 
bow under his chin, was seated apart at the upper end of the room; 
where, as chief mourner, he had evidently been stationed by trabb. 
when i bent down and said to him, "dear joe, how are you?" he said, 
"pip, old chap, you knowed her when she were a fine figure of a-" 
and clasped my hand and said no more. 
biddy, looking very neat and modest in her black dress, went 
quietly here and there, and was very helpful. when i had spoken to 
biddy, as i thought it not a time for talking i went and sat down 
near joe, and there began to wonder in what part of the house it - 
she - my sister - was. the air of the parlour being faint with the 
smell of sweet cake, i looked about for the table of refreshments; 
it was scarcely visible until one had got accustomed to the gloom, 
but there was a cut-up plum-cake upon it, and there were cut-up 
oranges, and sandwiches, and biscuits, and two decanters that i 
knew very well as ornaments, but had never seen used in all my 
life; one full of port, and one of sherry. standing at this table, 
i became conscious of the servile pumblechook in a black cloak and 
several yards of hatband, who was alternately stuffing himself, and 
making obsequious movements to catch my attention. the moment he 
succeeded, he came over to me (breathing sherry and crumbs), and 
said in a subdued voice, "may i, dear sir?" and did. i then 
descried mr. and mrs. hubble; the last-named in a decent speechless 
paroxysm in a corner. we were all going to "follow," and were all 
in course of being tied up separately (by trabb) into ridiculous 
bundles. 
"which i meantersay, pip," joe whispered me, as we were being what 
mr. trabb called "formed" in the parlour, two and two - and it was 
dreadfully like a preparation for some grim kind of dance; "which i 
meantersay, sir, as i would in preference have carried her to the 
church myself, along with three or four friendly ones wot come to 
it with willing harts and arms, but it were considered wot the 
neighbours would look down on such and would be of opinions as it 
were wanting in respect." 
"pocket-handkerchiefs out, all!" cried mr. trabb at this point, in a 
depressed business-like voice. "pocket-handkerchiefs out! we are 
ready!" 
so, we all put our pocket-handkerchiefs to our faces, as if our 
noses were bleeding, and filed out two and two; joe and i; biddy 
and pumblechook; mr. and mrs. hubble. the remains of my poor sister 
had been brought round by the kitchen door, and, it being a point 
of undertaking ceremony that the six bearers must be stifled and 
blinded under a horrible black velvet housing with a white border, 
the whole looked like a blind monster with twelve human legs, 
shuffling and blundering along, under the guidance of two keepers - 
the postboy and his comrade. 
the neighbourhood, however, highly approved of these arrangements, 
and we were much admired as we went through the village; the more 
youthful and vigorous part of the community making dashes now and 
then to cut us off, and lying in wait to intercept us at points of 
vantage. at such times the more exuberant among them called out in 
an excited manner on our emergence round some corner of expectancy, 
"here they come!" "here they are!" and we were all but cheered. in 
this progress i was much annoyed by the abject pumblechook, who, 
being behind me, persisted all the way as a delicate attention in 
arranging my streaming hatband, and smoothing my cloak. my thoughts 
were further distracted by the excessive pride of mr. and mrs. 
hubble, who were surpassingly conceited and vainglorious in being 
members of so distinguished a procession. 
and now, the range of marshes lay clear before us, with the sails 
of the ships on the river growing out of it; and we went into the 
churchyard, close to the graves of my unknown parents, philip 
pirrip, late of this parish, and also georgiana, wife of the above. 
and there, my sister was laid quietly in the earth while the larks 
sang high above it, and the light wind strewed it with beautiful 
shadows of clouds and trees. 
of the conduct of the worldly-minded pumblechook while this was 
doing, i desire to say no more than it was all addressed to me; and 
that even when those noble passages were read which remind humanity 
how it brought nothing into the world and can take nothing out, and 
how it fleeth like a shadow and never continueth long in one stay, 
i heard him cough a reservation of the case of a young gentleman 
who came unexpectedly into large property. when we got back, he had 
the hardihood to tell me that he wished my sister could have known 
i had done her so much honour, and to hint that she would have 
considered it reasonably purchased at the price of her death. after 
that, he drank all the rest of the sherry, and mr. hubble drank the 
port, and the two talked (which i have since observed to be 
customary in such cases) as if they were of quite another race from 
the deceased, and were notoriously immortal. finally, he went away 
with mr. and mrs. hubble - to make an evening of it, i felt sure, and 
to tell the jolly bargemen that he was the founder of my fortunes 
and my earliest benefactor. 
when they were all gone, and when trabb and his men - but not his 
boy: i looked for him - had crammed their mummery into bags, and 
were gone too, the house felt wholesomer. soon afterwards, biddy, 
joe, and i, had a cold dinner together; but we dined in the best 
parlour, not in the old kitchen, and joe was so exceedingly 
particular what he did with his knife and fork and the saltcellar 
and what not, that there was great restraint upon us. but after 
dinner, when i made him take his pipe, and when i had loitered with 
him about the forge, and when we sat down together on the great 
block of stone outside it, we got on better. i noticed that after 
the funeral joe changed his clothes so far, as to make a compromise 
between his sunday dress and working dress: in which the dear 
fellow looked natural, and like the man he was. 
he was very much pleased by my asking if i might sleep in my own 
little room, and i was pleased too; for, i felt that i had done 
rather a great thing in making the request. when the shadows of 
evening were closing in, i took an opportunity of getting into the 
garden with biddy for a little talk. 
"biddy," said i, "i think you might have written to me about these 
sad matters." 
"do you, mr. pip?" said biddy. "i should have written if i had 
thought that." 
"don't suppose that i mean to be unkind, biddy, when i say i 
consider that you ought to have thought that." 
"do you, mr. pip?" 
she was so quiet, and had such an orderly, good, and pretty way 
with her, that i did not like the thought of making her cry again. 
after looking a little at her downcast eyes as she walked beside 
me, i gave up that point. 
"i suppose it will be difficult for you to remain here now, biddy 
dear?" 
"oh! i can't do so, mr. pip," said biddy, in a tone of regret, but 
still of quiet conviction. "i have been speaking to mrs. hubble, and 
i am going to her to-morrow. i hope we shall be able to take some 
care of mr. gargery, together, until he settles down." 
"how are you going to live, biddy? if you want any mo-" 
"how am i going to live?" repeated biddy, striking in, with a 
momentary flush upon her face. "i'll tell you, mr. pip. i am going 
to try to get the place of mistress in the new school nearly 
finished here. i can be well recommended by all the neighbours, and 
i hope i can be industrious and patient, and teach myself while i 
teach others. you know, mr. pip," pursued biddy, with a smile, as 
she raised her eyes to my face, "the new schools are not like the 
old, but i learnt a good deal from you after that time, and have 
had time since then to improve." 
"i think you would always improve, biddy, under any circumstances." 
"ah! except in my bad side of human nature," murmured biddy. 
it was not so much a reproach, as an irresistible thinking aloud. 
well! i thought i would give up that point too. so, i walked a 
little further with biddy, looking silently at her downcast eyes. 
"i have not heard the particulars of my sister's death, biddy." 
"they are very slight, poor thing. she had been in one of her bad 
states - though they had got better of late, rather than worse - 
for four days, when she came out of it in the evening, just at 
teatime, and said quite plainly, 'joe.' as she had never said any 
word for a long while, i ran and fetched in mr. gargery from the 
forge. she made signs to me that she wanted him to sit down close 
to her, and wanted me to put her arms round his neck. so i put them 
round his neck, and she laid her head down on his shoulder quite 
content and satisfied. and so she presently said 'joe' again, and 
once 'pardon,' and once 'pip.' and so she never lifted her head up 
any more, and it was just an hour later when we laid it down on her 
own bed, because we found she was gone." 
biddy cried; the darkening garden, and the lane, and the stars that 
were coming out, were blurred in my own sight. 
"nothing was ever discovered, biddy?" 
"nothing." 
"do you know what is become of orlick?" 
"i should think from the colour of his clothes that he is working 
in the quarries." 
"of course you have seen him then? - why are you looking at that 
dark tree in the lane?" 
"i saw him there, on the night she died." 
"that was not the last time either, biddy?" 
"no; i have seen him there, since we have been walking here. - it 
is of no use," said biddy, laying her hand upon my arm, as i was 
for running out, "you know i would not deceive you; he was not 
there a minute, and he is gone." 
it revived my utmost indignation to find that she was still pursued 
by this fellow, and i felt inveterate against him. i told her so, 
and told her that i would spend any money or take any pains to 
drive him out of that country. by degrees she led me into more 
temperate talk, and she told me how joe loved me, and how joe never 
complained of anything - she didn't say, of me; she had no need; i 
knew what she meant - but ever did his duty in his way of life, 
with a strong hand, a quiet tongue, and a gentle heart. 
"indeed, it would be hard to say too much for him," said i; "and 
biddy, we must often speak of these things, for of course i shall 
be often down here now. i am not going to leave poor joe alone." 
biddy said never a single word. 
"biddy, don't you hear me?" 
"yes, mr. pip." 
"not to mention your calling me mr. pip - which appears to me to be 
in bad taste, biddy - what do you mean?" 
"what do i mean?" asked biddy, timidly. 
"biddy," said i, in a virtuously self-asserting manner, "i must 
request to know what you mean by this?" 
"by this?" said biddy. 
"now, don't echo," i retorted. "you used not to echo, biddy." 
"used not!" said biddy. "o mr. pip! used!" 
well! i rather thought i would give up that point too. after 
another silent turn in the garden, i fell back on the main 
position. 
"biddy," said i, "i made a remark respecting my coming down here 
often, to see joe, which you received with a marked silence. have 
the goodness, biddy, to tell me why." 
"are you quite sure, then, that you will come to see him often?" 
asked biddy, stopping in the narrow garden walk, and looking at me 
under the stars with a clear and honest eye. 
"oh dear me!" said i, as if i found myself compelled to give up 
biddy in despair. "this really is a very bad side of human 
nature! don't say any more, if you please, biddy. this shocks me 
very much." 
for which cogent reason i kept biddy at a distance during supper, 
and, when i went up to my own old little room, took as stately a 
leave of her as i could, in my murmuring soul, deem reconcilable 
with the churchyard and the event of the day. as often as i was 
restless in the night, and that was every quarter of an hour, i 
reflected what an unkindness, what an injury, what an injustice, 
biddy had done me. 
early in the morning, i was to go. early in the morning, i was out, 
and looking in, unseen, at one of the wooden windows of the forge. 
there i stood, for minutes, looking at joe, already at work with a 
glow of health and strength upon his face that made it show as if 
the bright sun of the life in store for him were shining on it. 
"good-bye, dear joe! - no, don't wipe it off - for god's sake, give 
me your blackened hand! - i shall be down soon, and often." 
"never too soon, sir," said joe, "and never too often, pip!" 
biddy was waiting for me at the kitchen door, with a mug of new 
milk and a crust of bread. "biddy," said i, when i gave her my hand 
at parting, "i am not angry, but i am hurt." 
"no, don't be hurt," she pleaded quite pathetically; "let only me 
be hurt, if i have been ungenerous." 
once more, the mists were rising as i walked away. if they 
disclosed to me, as i suspect they did, that i should not come 
back, and that biddy was quite right, all i can say is - they were 
quite right too. 
chapter 36 
herbert and i went on from bad to worse, in the way of increasing 
our debts, looking into our affairs, leaving margins, and the like 
exemplary transactions; and time went on, whether or no, as he has 
a way of doing; and i came of age - in fulfilment of herbert's 
prediction, that i should do so before i knew where i was. 
herbert himself had come of age, eight months before me. as he had 
nothing else than his majority to come into, the event did not make 
a profound sensation in barnard's inn. but we had looked forward to 
my one-and-twentieth birthday, with a crowd of speculations and 
anticipations, for we had both considered that my guardian could 
hardly help saying something definite on that occasion. 
i had taken care to have it well understood in little britain, when 
my birthday was. on the day before it, i received an official note 
from wemmick, informing me that mr. jaggers would be glad if i would 
call upon him at five in the afternoon of the auspicious day. this 
convinced us that something great was to happen, and threw me into 
an unusual flutter when i repaired to my guardian's office, a model 
of punctuality. 
in the outer office wemmick offered me his congratulations, and 
incidentally rubbed the side of his nose with a folded piece of 
tissuepaper that i liked the look of. but he said nothing 
respecting it, and motioned me with a nod into my guardian's room. 
it was november, and my guardian was standing before his fire 
leaning his back against the chimney-piece, with his hands under 
his coattails. 
"well, pip," said he, "i must call you mr. pip to-day. 
congratulations, mr. pip." 
we shook hands - he was always a remarkably short shaker - and i 
thanked him. 
"take a chair, mr. pip," said my guardian. 
as i sat down, and he preserved his attitude and bent his brows at 
his boots, i felt at a disadvantage, which reminded me of that old 
time when i had been put upon a tombstone. the two ghastly casts on 
the shelf were not far from him, and their expression was as if 
they were making a stupid apoplectic attempt to attend to the 
conversation. 
"now my young friend," my guardian began, as if i were a witness in 
the box, "i am going to have a word or two with you." 
"if you please, sir." 
"what do you suppose," said mr. jaggers, bending forward to look at 
the ground, and then throwing his head back to look at the ceiling, 
"what do you suppose you are living at the rate of?" 
"at the rate of, sir?" 
"at," repeated mr. jaggers, still looking at the ceiling, "the - 
rate - of?" and then looked all round the room, and paused with his 
pocket-handkerchief in his hand, half way to his nose. 
i had looked into my affairs so often, that i had thoroughly 
destroyed any slight notion i might ever have had of their 
bearings. reluctantly, i confessed myself quite unable to answer 
the question. this reply seemed agreeable to mr. jaggers, who said, 
"i thought so!" and blew his nose with an air of satisfaction. 
"now, i have asked you a question, my friend," said mr. jaggers. 
"have you anything to ask me?" 
"of course it would be a great relief to me to ask you several 
questions, sir; but i remember your prohibition." 
"ask one," said mr. jaggers. 
"is my benefactor to be made known to me to-day?" 
"no. ask another." 
"is that confidence to be imparted to me soon?" 
"waive that, a moment," said mr. jaggers, "and ask another." 
i looked about me, but there appeared to be now no possible escape 
from the inquiry, "have - i - anything to receive, sir?" on that, 
mr. jaggers said, triumphantly, "i thought we should come to it!" 
and called to wemmick to give him that piece of paper. wemmick 
appeared, handed it in, and disappeared. 
"now, mr. pip," said mr. jaggers, "attend, if you please. you have 
been drawing pretty freely here; your name occurs pretty often in 
wemmick's cash-book; but you are in debt, of course?" 
"i am afraid i must say yes, sir." 
"you know you must say yes; don't you?" said mr. jaggers. 
"yes, sir." 
"i don't ask you what you owe, because you don't know; and if you 
did know, you wouldn't tell me; you would say less. yes, yes, my 
friend," cried mr. jaggers, waving his forefinger to stop me, as i 
made a show of protesting: "it's likely enough that you think you 
wouldn't, but you would. you'll excuse me, but i know better than 
you. now, take this piece of paper in your hand. you have got it? 
very good. now, unfold it and tell me what it is." 
"this is a bank-note," said i, "for five hundred pounds." 
"that is a bank-note," repeated mr. jaggers, "for five hundred 
pounds. and a very handsome sum of money too, i think. you consider 
it so?" 
"how could i do otherwise!" 
"ah! but answer the question," said mr. jaggers. 
"undoubtedly." 
"you consider it, undoubtedly, a handsome sum of money. now, that 
handsome sum of money, pip, is your own. it is a present to you on 
this day, in earnest of your expectations. and at the rate of that 
handsome sum of money per annum, and at no higher rate, you are to 
live until the donor of the whole appears. that is to say, you will 
now take your money affairs entirely into your own hands, and you 
will draw from wemmick one hundred and twenty-five pounds per 
quarter, until you are in communication with the fountain-head, and 
no longer with the mere agent. as i have told you before, i am the 
mere agent. i execute my instructions, and i am paid for doing so. 
i think them injudicious, but i am not paid for giving any opinion 
on their merits." 
i was beginning to express my gratitude to my benefactor for the 
great liberality with which i was treated, when mr. jaggers stopped 
me. "i am not paid, pip," said he, coolly, "to carry your words to 
any one;" and then gathered up his coat-tails, as he had gathered 
up the subject, and stood frowning at his boots as if he suspected 
them of designs against him. 
after a pause, i hinted: 
"there was a question just now, mr. jaggers, which you desired me to 
waive for a moment. i hope i am doing nothing wrong in asking it 
again?" 
"what is it?" said he. 
i might have known that he would never help me out; but it took me 
aback to have to shape the question afresh, as if it were quite 
new. "is it likely," i said, after hesitating, "that my patron, the 
fountain-head you have spoken of, mr. jaggers, will soon-" there i 
delicately stopped. 
"will soon what?" asked mr. jaggers. "that's no question as it 
stands, you know." 
"will soon come to london," said i, after casting about for a 
precise form of words, "or summon me anywhere else?" 
"now here," replied mr. jaggers, fixing me for the first time with 
his dark deep-set eyes, "we must revert to the evening when we 
first encountered one another in your village. what did i tell you 
then, pip?" 
"you told me, mr. jaggers, that it might be years hence when that 
person appeared." 
"just so," said mr. jaggers; "that's my answer." 
as we looked full at one another, i felt my breath come quicker in 
my strong desire to get something out of him. and as i felt that it 
came quicker, and as i felt that he saw that it came quicker, i 
felt that i had less chance than ever of getting anything out of 
him. 
"do you suppose it will still be years hence, mr. jaggers?" 
mr. jaggers shook his head - not in negativing the question, but in 
altogether negativing the notion that he could anyhow be got to 
answer it - and the two horrible casts of the twitched faces 
looked, when my eyes strayed up to them, as if they had come to a 
crisis in their suspended attention, and were going to sneeze. 
"come!" said mr. jaggers, warming the backs of his legs with the 
backs of his warmed hands, "i'll be plain with you, my friend pip. 
that's a question i must not be asked. you'll understand that, 
better, when i tell you it's a question that might compromise me. 
come! i'll go a little further with you; i'll say something more." 
he bent down so low to frown at his boots, that he was able to rub 
the calves of his legs in the pause he made. 
"when that person discloses," said mr. jaggers, straightening 
himself, "you and that person will settle your own affairs. when 
that person discloses, my part in this business will cease and 
determine. when that person discloses, it will not be necessary for 
me to know anything about it. and that's all i have got to say." 
we looked at one another until i withdrew my eyes, and looked 
thoughtfully at the floor. from this last speech i derived the 
notion that miss havisham, for some reason or no reason, had not 
taken him into her confidence as to her designing me for estella; 
that he resented this, and felt a jealousy about it; or that he 
really did object to that scheme, and would have nothing to do with 
it. when i raised my eyes again, i found that he had been shrewdly 
looking at me all the time, and was doing so still. 
"if that is all you have to say, sir," i remarked, "there can be 
nothing left for me to say." 
he nodded assent, and pulled out his thief-dreaded watch, and asked 
me where i was going to dine? i replied at my own chambers, with 
herbert. as a necessary sequence, i asked him if he would favour us 
with his company, and he promptly accepted the invitation. but he 
insisted on walking home with me, in order that i might make no 
extra preparation for him, and first he had a letter or two to 
write, and (of course) had his hands to wash. so, i said i would go 
into the outer office and talk to wemmick. 
the fact was, that when the five hundred pounds had come into my 
pocket, a thought had come into my head which had been often there 
before; and it appeared to me that wemmick was a good person to 
advise with, concerning such thought. 
he had already locked up his safe, and made preparations for going 
home. he had left his desk, brought out his two greasy office 
candlesticks and stood them in line with the snuffers on a slab 
near the door, ready to be extinguished; he had raked his fire low, 
put his hat and great-coat ready, and was beating himself all over 
the chest with his safe-key, as an athletic exercise after 
business. 
"mr. wemmick," said i, "i want to ask your opinion. i am very 
desirous to serve a friend." 
wemmick tightened his post-office and shook his head, as if his 
opinion were dead against any fatal weakness of that sort. 
"this friend," i pursued, "is trying to get on in commercial life, 
but has no money, and finds it difficult and disheartening to make 
a beginning. now, i want somehow to help him to a beginning." 
"with money down?" said wemmick, in a tone drier than any sawdust. 
"with some money down," i replied, for an uneasy remembrance shot 
across me of that symmetrical bundle of papers at home; "with some 
money down, and perhaps some anticipation of my expectations." 
"mr. pip," said wemmick, "i should like just to run over with you on 
my fingers, if you please, the names of the various bridges up as 
high as chelsea reach. let's see; there's london, one; southwark, 
two; blackfriars, three; waterloo, four; westminster, five; 
vauxhall, six." he had checked off each bridge in its turn, with 
the handle of his safe-key on the palm of his hand. "there's as 
many as six, you see, to choose from." 
"i don't understand you," said i. 
"choose your bridge, mr. pip," returned wemmick, "and take a walk 
upon your bridge, and pitch your money into the thames over the 
centre arch of your bridge, and you know the end of it. serve a 
friend with it, and you may know the end of it too - but it's a 
less pleasant and profitable end." 
i could have posted a newspaper in his mouth, he made it so wide 
after saying this. 
"this is very discouraging," said i. 
"meant to be so," said wemmick. 
"then is it your opinion," i inquired, with some little 
indignation, "that a man should never-" 
" - invest portable property in a friend?" said wemmick. "certainly 
he should not. unless he wants to get rid of the friend - and then 
it becomes a question how much portable property it may be worth to 
get rid of him." 
"and that," said i, "is your deliberate opinion, mr. wemmick?" 
"that," he returned, "is my deliberate opinion in this office." 
"ah!" said i, pressing him, for i thought i saw him near a loophole 
here; "but would that be your opinion at walworth?" 
"mr. pip," he replied, with gravity, "walworth is one place, and 
this office is another. much as the aged is one person, and mr. 
jaggers is another. they must not be confounded together. my 
walworth sentiments must be taken at walworth; none but my official 
sentiments can be taken in this office." 
"very well," said i, much relieved, "then i shall look you up at 
walworth, you may depend upon it." 
"mr. pip," he returned, "you will be welcome there, in a private and 
personal capacity." 
we had held this conversation in a low voice, well knowing my 
guardian's ears to be the sharpest of the sharp. as he now appeared 
in his doorway, towelling his hands, wemmick got on his greatcoat 
and stood by to snuff out the candles. we all three went into the 
street together, and from the door-step wemmick turned his way, and 
mr. jaggers and i turned ours. 
i could not help wishing more than once that evening, that mr. 
jaggers had had an aged in gerrard-street, or a stinger, or a 
something, or a somebody, to unbend his brows a little. it was an 
uncomfortable consideration on a twenty-first birthday, that coming 
of age at all seemed hardly worth while in such a guarded and 
suspicious world as he made of it. he was a thousand times better 
informed and cleverer than wemmick, and yet i would a thousand 
times rather have had wemmick to dinner. and mr. jaggers made not me 
alone intensely melancholy, because, after he was gone, herbert 
said of himself, with his eyes fixed on the fire, that he thought 
he must have committed a felony and forgotten the details of it, he 
felt so dejected and guilty. 
chapter 37 
deeming sunday the best day for taking mr. wemmick's walworth 
sentiments, i devoted the next ensuing sunday afternoon to a 
pilgrimage to the castle. on arriving before the battlements, i 
found the union jack flying and the drawbridge up; but undeterred 
by this show of defiance and resistance, i rang at the gate, and 
was admitted in a most pacific manner by the aged. 
"my son, sir," said the old man, after securing the drawbridge, 
"rather had it in his mind that you might happen to drop in, and he 
left word that he would soon be home from his afternoon's walk. he 
is very regular in his walks, is my son. very regular in 
everything, is my son." 
i nodded at the old gentleman as wemmick himself might have nodded, 
and we went in and sat down by the fireside. 
"you made acquaintance with my son, sir," said the old man, in his 
chirping way, while he warmed his hands at the blaze, "at his 
office, i expect?" i nodded. "hah! i have heerd that my son is a 
wonderful hand at his business, sir?" i nodded hard. "yes; so they 
tell me. his business is the law?" i nodded harder. "which makes it 
more surprising in my son," said the old man, "for he was not 
brought up to the law, but to the wine-coopering." 
curious to know how the old gentleman stood informed concerning the 
reputation of mr. jaggers, i roared that name at him. he threw me 
into the greatest confusion by laughing heartily and replying in a 
very sprightly manner, "no, to be sure; you're right." and to this 
hour i have not the faintest notion what he meant, or what joke he 
thought i had made. 
as i could not sit there nodding at him perpetually, without making 
some other attempt to interest him, i shouted at inquiry whether 
his own calling in life had been "the wine-coopering." by dint of 
straining that term out of myself several times and tapping the old 
gentleman on the chest to associate it with him, i at last 
succeeded in making my meaning understood. 
"no," said the old gentleman; "the warehousing, the warehousing. 
first, over yonder;" he appeared to mean up the chimney, but i 
believe he intended to refer me to liverpool; "and then in the city 
of london here. however, having an infirmity - for i am hard of 
hearing, sir-" 
i expressed in pantomime the greatest astonishment. 
" - yes, hard of hearing; having that infirmity coming upon me, my 
son he went into the law, and he took charge of me, and he by 
little and little made out this elegant and beautiful property. but 
returning to what you said, you know," pursued the old man, again 
laughing heartily, "what i say is, no to be sure; you're right." 
i was modestly wondering whether my utmost ingenuity would have 
enabled me to say anything that would have amused him half as much 
as this imaginary pleasantry, when i was startled by a sudden click 
in the wall on one side of the chimney, and the ghostly tumbling 
open of a little wooden flap with "john" upon it. the old man, 
following my eyes, cried with great triumph, "my son's come home!" 
and we both went out to the drawbridge. 
it was worth any money to see wemmick waving a salute to me from 
the other side of the moat, when we might have shaken hands across 
it with the greatest ease. the aged was so delighted to work the 
drawbridge, that i made no offer to assist him, but stood quiet 
until wemmick had come across, and had presented me to miss 
skiffins: a lady by whom he was accompanied. 
miss skiffins was of a wooden appearance, and was, like her escort, 
in the post-office branch of the service. she might have been some 
two or three years younger than wemmick, and i judged her to stand 
possessed of portable property. the cut of her dress from the waist 
upward, both before and behind, made her figure very like a boy's 
kite; and i might have pronounced her gown a little too decidedly 
orange, and her gloves a little too intensely green. but she seemed 
to be a good sort of fellow, and showed a high regard for the aged. 
i was not long in discovering that she was a frequent visitor at 
the castle; for, on our going in, and my complimenting wemmick on 
his ingenious contrivance for announcing himself to the aged, he 
begged me to give my attention for a moment to the other side of 
the chimney, and disappeared. presently another click came, and 
another little door tumbled open with "miss skiffins" on it; then 
miss skiffins shut up and john tumbled open; then miss skiffins and 
john both tumbled open together, and finally shut up together. on 
wemmick's return from working these mechanical appliances, i 
expressed the great admiration with which i regarded them, and he 
said, "well, you know, they're both pleasant and useful to the 
aged. and by george, sir, it's a thing worth mentioning, that of 
all the people who come to this gate, the secret of those pulls is 
only known to the aged, miss skiffins, and me!" 
"and mr. wemmick made them," added miss skiffins, "with his own 
hands out of his own head." 
while miss skiffins was taking off her bonnet (she retained her 
green gloves during the evening as an outward and visible sign that 
there was company), wemmick invited me to take a walk with him 
round the property, and see how the island looked in wintertime. 
thinking that he did this to give me an opportunity of taking his 
walworth sentiments, i seized the opportunity as soon as we were 
out of the castle. 
having thought of the matter with care, i approached my subject as 
if i had never hinted at it before. i informed wemmick that i was 
anxious in behalf of herbert pocket, and i told him how we had 
first met, and how we had fought. i glanced at herbert's home, and 
at his character, and at his having no means but such as he was 
dependent on his father for: those, uncertain and unpunctual. 
i alluded to the advantages i had derived in my first rawness and 
ignorance from his society, and i confessed that i feared i had but 
ill repaid them, and that he might have done better without me and 
my expectations. keeping miss havisham in the background at a great 
distance, i still hinted at the possibility of my having competed 
with him in his prospects, and at the certainty of his possessing a 
generous soul, and being far above any mean distrusts, 
retaliations, or designs. for all these reasons (i told wemmick), 
and because he was my young companion and friend, and i had a great 
affection for him, i wished my own good fortune to reflect some 
rays upon him, and therefore i sought advice from wemmick's 
experience and knowledge of men and affairs, how i could best try 
with my resources to help herbert to some present income - say of a 
hundred a year, to keep him in good hope and heart - and gradually 
to buy him on to some small partnership. i begged wemmick, in 
conclusion, to understand that my help must always be rendered 
without herbert's knowledge or suspicion, and that there was no one 
else in the world with whom i could advise. i wound up by laying my 
hand upon his shoulder, and saying, "i can't help confiding in you, 
though i know it must be troublesome to you; but that is your 
fault, in having ever brought me here." 
wemmick was silent for a little while, and then said with a kind of 
start, "well you know, mr. pip, i must tell you one thing. this is 
devilish good of you." 
"say you'll help me to be good then," said i. 
"ecod," replied wemmick, shaking his head, "that's not my trade." 
"nor is this your trading-place," said i. 
"you are right," he returned. "you hit the nail on the head. mr. 
pip, i'll put on my considering-cap, and i think all you want to 
do, may be done by degrees. skiffins (that's her brother) is an 
accountant and agent. i'll look him up and go to work for you." 
"i thank you ten thousand times." 
"on the contrary," said he, "i thank you, for though we are 
strictly in our private and personal capacity, still it may be 
mentioned that there are newgate cobwebs about, and it brushes them 
away." 
after a little further conversation to the same effect, we returned 
into the castle where we found miss skiffins preparing tea. the 
responsible duty of making the toast was delegated to the aged, and 
that excellent old gentleman was so intent upon it that he seemed 
to me in some danger of melting his eyes. it was no nominal meal 
that we were going to make, but a vigorous reality. the aged 
prepared such a haystack of buttered toast, that i could scarcely 
see him over it as it simmered on an iron stand hooked on to the 
top-bar; while miss skiffins brewed such a jorum of tea, that the 
pig in the back premises became strongly excited, and repeatedly 
expressed his desire to participate in the entertainment. 
the flag had been struck, and the gun had been fired, at the right 
moment of time, and i felt as snugly cut off from the rest of 
walworth as if the moat were thirty feet wide by as many deep. 
nothing disturbed the tranquillity of the castle, but the 
occasional tumbling open of john and miss skiffins: which little 
doors were a prey to some spasmodic infirmity that made me 
sympathetically uncomfortable until i got used to it. i inferred 
from the methodical nature of miss skiffins's arrangements that she 
made tea there every sunday night; and i rather suspected that a 
classic brooch she wore, representing the profile of an undesirable 
female with a very straight nose and a very new moon, was a piece 
of portable property that had been given her by wemmick. 
we ate the whole of the toast, and drank tea in proportion, and it 
was delightful to see how warm and greasy we all got after it. the 
aged especially, might have passed for some clean old chief of a 
savage tribe, just oiled. after a short pause for repose, miss 
skiffins - in the absence of the little servant who, it seemed, 
retired to the bosom of her family on sunday afternoons - washed up 
the tea-things, in a trifling lady-like amateur manner that 
compromised none of us. then, she put on her gloves again, and we 
drew round the fire, and wemmick said, "now aged parent, tip us the 
paper." 
wemmick explained to me while the aged got his spectacles out, that 
this was according to custom, and that it gave the old gentleman 
infinite satisfaction to read the news aloud. "i won't offer an 
apology," said wemmick, "for he isn't capable of many pleasures - 
are you, aged p.?" 
"all right, john, all right," returned the old man, seeing himself 
spoken to. 
"only tip him a nod every now and then when he looks off his 
paper," said wemmick, "and he'll be as happy as a king. we are all 
attention, aged one." 
"all right, john, all right!" returned the cheerful old man: so 
busy and so pleased, that it really was quite charming. 
the aged's reading reminded me of the classes at mr. wopsle's 
great-aunt's, with the pleasanter peculiarity that it seemed to 
come through a keyhole. as he wanted the candles close to him, and 
as he was always on the verge of putting either his head or the 
newspaper into them, he required as much watching as a powder-mill. 
but wemmick was equally untiring and gentle in his vigilance, and 
the aged read on, quite unconscious of his many rescues. whenever 
he looked at us, we all expressed the greatest interest and 
amazement, and nodded until he resumed again. 
as wemmick and miss skiffins sat side by side, and as i sat in a 
shadowy corner, i observed a slow and gradual elongation of mr. 
wemmick's mouth, powerfully suggestive of his slowly and gradually 
stealing his arm round miss skiffins's waist. in course of time i 
saw his hand appear on the other side of miss skiffins; but at that 
moment miss skiffins neatly stopped him with the green glove, 
unwound his arm again as if it were an article of dress, and with 
the greatest deliberation laid it on the table before her. miss 
skiffins's composure while she did this was one of the most 
remarkable sights i have ever seen, and if i could have thought the 
act consistent with abstraction of mind, i should have deemed that 
miss skiffins performed it mechanically. 
by-and-by, i noticed wemmick's arm beginning to disappear again, 
and gradually fading out of view. shortly afterwards, his mouth 
began to widen again. after an interval of suspense on my part that 
was quite enthralling and almost painful, i saw his hand appear on 
the other side of miss skiffins. instantly, miss skiffins stopped 
it with the neatness of a placid boxer, took off that girdle or 
cestus as before, and laid it on the table. taking the table to 
represent the path of virtue, i am justified in stating that during 
the whole time of the aged's reading, wemmick's arm was straying 
from the path of virtue and being recalled to it by miss skiffins. 
at last, the aged read himself into a light slumber. this was the 
time for wemmick to produce a little kettle, a tray of glasses, and 
a black bottle with a porcelain-topped cork, representing some 
clerical dignitary of a rubicund and social aspect. with the aid of 
these appliances we all had something warm to drink: including the 
aged, who was soon awake again. miss skiffins mixed, and i observed 
that she and wemmick drank out of one glass. of course i knew 
better than to offer to see miss skiffins home, and under the 
circumstances i thought i had best go first: which i did, taking a 
cordial leave of the aged, and having passed a pleasant evening. 
before a week was out, i received a note from wemmick, dated 
walworth, stating that he hoped he had made some advance in that 
matter appertaining to our private and personal capacities, and 
that he would be glad if i could come and see him again upon it. 
so, i went out to walworth again, and yet again, and yet again, and 
i saw him by appointment in the city several times, but never held 
any communication with him on the subject in or near little 
britain. the upshot was, that we found a worthy young merchant or 
shipping-broker, not long established in business, who wanted 
intelligent help, and who wanted capital, and who in due course of 
time and receipt would want a partner. between him and me, secret 
articles were signed of which herbert was the subject, and i paid 
him half of my five hundred pounds down, and engaged for sundry 
other payments: some, to fall due at certain dates out of my 
income: some, contingent on my coming into my property. miss 
skiffins's brother conducted the negotiation. wemmick pervaded it 
throughout, but never appeared in it. 
the whole business was so cleverly managed, that herbert had not 
the least suspicion of my hand being in it. i never shall forget 
the radiant face with which he came home one afternoon, and told 
me, as a mighty piece of news, of his having fallen in with one 
clarriker (the young merchant's name), and of clarriker's having 
shown an extraordinary inclination towards him, and of his belief 
that the opening had come at last. day by day as his hopes grew 
stronger and his face brighter, he must have thought me a more and 
more affectionate friend, for i had the greatest difficulty in 
restraining my tears of triumph when i saw him so happy. at length, 
the thing being done, and he having that day entered clarriker's 
house, and he having talked to me for a whole evening in a flush of 
pleasure and success, i did really cry in good earnest when i went 
to bed, to think that my expectations had done some good to 
somebody. 
a great event in my life, the turning point of my life, now opens 
on my view. but, before i proceed to narrate it, and before i pass 
on to all the changes it involved, i must give one chapter to 
estella. it is not much to give to the theme that so long filled 
my heart. 
chapter 38 
if that staid old house near the green at richmond should ever come 
to be haunted when i am dead, it will be haunted, surely, by my 
ghost. o the many, many nights and days through which the unquiet 
spirit within me haunted that house when estella lived there! let 
my body be where it would, my spirit was always wandering, 
wandering, wandering, about that house. 
the lady with whom estella was placed, mrs. brandley by name, was a 
widow, with one daughter several years older than estella. the 
mother looked young, and the daughter looked old; the mother's 
complexion was pink, and the daughter's was yellow; the mother set 
up for frivolity, and the daughter for theology. they were in what 
is called a good position, and visited, and were visited by, 
numbers of people. little, if any, community of feeling subsisted 
between them and estella, but the understanding was established 
that they were necessary to her, and that she was necessary to 
them. mrs. brandley had been a friend of miss havisham's before the 
time of her seclusion. 
in mrs. brandley's house and out of mrs. brandley's house, i suffered 
every kind and degree of torture that estella could cause me. the 
nature of my relations with her, which placed me on terms of 
familiarity without placing me on terms of favour, conduced to my 
distraction. she made use of me to tease other admirers, and she 
turned the very familiarity between herself and me, to the account 
of putting a constant slight on my devotion to her. if i had been 
her secretary, steward, half-brother, poor relation - if i had been 
a younger brother of her appointed husband - i could not have 
seemed to myself, further from my hopes when i was nearest to her. 
the privilege of calling her by her name and hearing her call me by 
mine, became under the circumstances an aggravation of my trials; 
and while i think it likely that it almost maddened her other 
lovers, i know too certainly that it almost maddened me. 
she had admirers without end. no doubt my jealousy made an admirer 
of every one who went near her; but there were more than enough of 
them without that. 
i saw her often at richmond, i heard of her often in town, and i 
used often to take her and the brandleys on the water; there were 
picnics, fete days, plays, operas, concerts, parties, all sorts of 
pleasures, through which i pursued her - and they were all miseries 
to me. i never had one hour's happiness in her society, and yet my 
mind all round the four-and-twenty hours was harping on the 
happiness of having her with me unto death. 
throughout this part of our intercourse - and it lasted, as will 
presently be seen, for what i then thought a long time - she 
habitually reverted to that tone which expressed that our 
association was forced upon us. there were other times when she 
would come to a sudden check in this tone and in all her many 
tones, and would seem to pity me. 
"pip, pip," she said one evening, coming to such a check, when we 
sat apart at a darkening window of the house in richmond; "will you 
never take warning?" 
"of what?" 
"of me." 
"warning not to be attracted by you, do you mean, estella?" 
"do i mean! if you don't know what i mean, you are blind." 
i should have replied that love was commonly reputed blind, but for 
the reason that i always was restrained - and this was not the 
least of my miseries - by a feeling that it was ungenerous to press 
myself upon her, when she knew that she could not choose but obey 
miss havisham. my dread always was, that this knowledge on her part 
laid me under a heavy disadvantage with her pride, and made me the 
subject of a rebellious struggle in her bosom. 
"at any rate," said i, "i have no warning given me just now, for 
you wrote to me to come to you, this time." 
"that's true," said estella, with a cold careless smile that always 
chilled me. 
after looking at the twilight without, for a little while, she went 
on to say: 
"the time has come round when miss havisham wishes to have me for a 
day at satis. you are to take me there, and bring me back, if you 
will. she would rather i did not travel alone, and objects to 
receiving my maid, for she has a sensitive horror of being talked 
of by such people. can you take me?" 
"can i take you, estella!" 
"you can then? the day after to-morrow, if you please. you are to 
pay all charges out of my purse, you hear the condition of your 
going?" 
"and must obey," said i. 
this was all the preparation i received for that visit, or for 
others like it: miss havisham never wrote to me, nor had i ever so 
much as seen her handwriting. we went down on the next day but one, 
and we found her in the room where i had first beheld her, and it 
is needless to add that there was no change in satis house. 
she was even more dreadfully fond of estella than she had been when 
i last saw them together; i repeat the word advisedly, for there 
was something positively dreadful in the energy of her looks and 
embraces. she hung upon estella's beauty, hung upon her words, hung 
upon her gestures, and sat mumbling her own trembling fingers while 
she looked at her, as though she were devouring the beautiful 
creature she had reared. 
from estella she looked at me, with a searching glance that seemed 
to pry into my heart and probe its wounds. "how does she use you, 
pip; how does she use you?" she asked me again, with her witch-like 
eagerness, even in estella's hearing. but, when we sat by her 
flickering fire at night, she was most weird; for then, keeping 
estella's hand drawn through her arm and clutched in her own hand, 
she extorted from her, by dint of referring back to what estella 
had told her in her regular letters, the names and conditions of 
the men whom she had fascinated; and as miss havisham dwelt upon 
this roll, with the intensity of a mind mortally hurt and diseased, 
she sat with her other hand on her crutch stick, and her chin on 
that, and her wan bright eyes glaring at me, a very spectre. 
i saw in this, wretched though it made me, and bitter the sense of 
dependence and even of degradation that it awakened - i saw in 
this, that estella was set to wreak miss havisham's revenge on men, 
and that she was not to be given to me until she had gratified it 
for a term. i saw in this, a reason for her being beforehand 
assigned to me. sending her out to attract and torment and do 
mischief, miss havisham sent her with the malicious assurance that 
she was beyond the reach of all admirers, and that all who staked 
upon that cast were secured to lose. i saw in this, that i, too, 
was tormented by a perversion of ingenuity, even while the prize 
was reserved for me. i saw in this, the reason for my being staved 
off so long, and the reason for my late guardian's declining to 
commit himself to the formal knowledge of such a scheme. in a word, 
i saw in this, miss havisham as i had her then and there before my 
eyes, and always had had her before my eyes; and i saw in this, the 
distinct shadow of the darkened and unhealthy house in which her 
life was hidden from the sun. 
the candles that lighted that room of hers were placed in sconces 
on the wall. they were high from the ground, and they burnt with 
the steady dulness of artificial light in air that is seldom 
renewed. as i looked round at them, and at the pale gloom they 
made, and at the stopped clock, and at the withered articles of 
bridal dress upon the table and the ground, and at her own awful 
figure with its ghostly reflection thrown large by the fire upon 
the ceiling and the wall, i saw in everything the construction that 
my mind had come to, repeated and thrown back to me. my thoughts 
passed into the great room across the landing where the table was 
spread, and i saw it written, as it were, in the falls of the 
cobwebs from the centre-piece, in the crawlings of the spiders on 
the cloth, in the tracks of the mice as they betook their little 
quickened hearts behind the panels, and in the gropings and 
pausings of the beetles on the floor. 
it happened on the occasion of this visit that some sharp words 
arose between estella and miss havisham. it was the first time i 
had ever seen them opposed. 
we were seated by the fire, as just now described, and miss 
havisham still had estella's arm drawn through her own, and still 
clutched estella's hand in hers, when estella gradually began to 
detach herself. she had shown a proud impatience more than once 
before, and had rather endured that fierce affection than accepted 
or returned it. 
"what!" said miss havisham, flashing her eyes upon her, "are you 
tired of me?" 
"only a little tired of myself," replied estella, disengaging her 
arm, and moving to the great chimney-piece, where she stood looking 
down at the fire. 
"speak the truth, you ingrate!" cried miss havisham, passionately 
striking her stick upon the floor; "you are tired of me." 
estella looked at her with perfect composure, and again looked down 
at the fire. her graceful figure and her beautiful face expressed a 
self-possessed indifference to the wild heat of the other, that was 
almost cruel. 
"you stock and stone!" exclaimed miss havisham. "you cold, cold 
heart!" 
"what?" said estella, preserving her attitude of indifference as 
she leaned against the great chimney-piece and only moving her 
eyes; "do you reproach me for being cold? you?" 
"are you not?" was the fierce retort. 
"you should know," said estella. "i am what you have made me. take 
all the praise, take all the blame; take all the success, take all 
the failure; in short, take me." 
"o, look at her, look at her!" cried miss havisham, bitterly; "look 
at her, so hard and thankless, on the hearth where she was reared! 
where i took her into this wretched breast when it was first 
bleeding from its stabs, and where i have lavished years of 
tenderness upon her!" 
"at least i was no party to the compact," said estella, "for if i 
could walk and speak, when it was made, it was as much as i could 
do. but what would you have? you have been very good to me, and i 
owe everything to you. what would you have?" 
"love," replied the other. 
"you have it." 
"i have not," said miss havisham. 
"mother by adoption," retorted estella, never departing from the 
easy grace of her attitude, never raising her voice as the other 
did, never yielding either to anger or tenderness, "mother by 
adoption, i have said that i owe everything to you. all i possess 
is freely yours. all that you have given me, is at your command to 
have again. beyond that, i have nothing. and if you ask me to give 
you what you never gave me, my gratitude and duty cannot do 
impossibilities." 
"did i never give her love!" cried miss havisham, turning wildly to 
me. "did i never give her a burning love, inseparable from jealousy 
at all times, and from sharp pain, while she speaks thus to me! let 
her call me mad, let her call me mad!" 
"why should i call you mad," returned estella, "i, of all people? 
does any one live, who knows what set purposes you have, half as 
well as i do? does any one live, who knows what a steady memory you 
have, half as well as i do? i who have sat on this same hearth on 
the little stool that is even now beside you there, learning your 
lessons and looking up into your face, when your face was strange 
and frightened me!" 
"soon forgotten!" moaned miss havisham. "times soon forgotten!" 
"no, not forgotten," retorted estella. "not forgotten, but 
treasured up in my memory. when have you found me false to your 
teaching? when have you found me unmindful of your lessons? when 
have you found me giving admission here," she touched her bosom 
with her hand, "to anything that you excluded? be just to me." 
"so proud, so proud!" moaned miss havisham, pushing away her grey 
hair with both her hands. 
"who taught me to be proud?" returned estella. "who praised me when 
i learnt my lesson?" 
"so hard, so hard!" moaned miss havisham, with her former action. 
"who taught me to be hard?" returned estella. "who praised me when 
i learnt my lesson?" 
"but to be proud and hard to me!" miss havisham quite shrieked, as 
she stretched out her arms. "estella, estella, estella, to be proud 
and hard to me!" 
estella looked at her for a moment with a kind of calm wonder, but 
was not otherwise disturbed; when the moment was past, she looked 
down at the fire again. 
"i cannot think," said estella, raising her eyes after a silence 
"why you should be so unreasonable when i come to see you after a 
separation. i have never forgotten your wrongs and their causes. i 
have never been unfaithful to you or your schooling. i have never 
shown any weakness that i can charge myself with." 
"would it be weakness to return my love?" exclaimed miss havisham. 
"but yes, yes, she would call it so!" 
"i begin to think," said estella, in a musing way, after another 
moment of calm wonder, "that i almost understand how this comes 
about. if you had brought up your adopted daughter wholly in the 
dark confinement of these rooms, and had never let her know that 
there was such a thing as the daylight by which she had never once 
seen your face - if you had done that, and then, for a purpose had 
wanted her to understand the daylight and know all about it, you 
would have been disappointed and angry?" 
miss havisham, with her head in her hands, sat making a low 
moaning, and swaying herself on her chair, but gave no answer. 
"or," said estella, " - which is a nearer case - if you had taught 
her, from the dawn of her intelligence, with your utmost energy and 
might, that there was such a thing as daylight, but that it was 
made to be her enemy and destroyer, and she must always turn 
against it, for it had blighted you and would else blight her; - if 
you had done this, and then, for a purpose, had wanted her to take 
naturally to the daylight and she could not do it, you would have 
been disappointed and angry?" 
miss havisham sat listening (or it seemed so, for i could not see 
her face), but still made no answer. 
"so," said estella, "i must be taken as i have been made. the 
success is not mine, the failure is not mine, but the two together 
make me." 
miss havisham had settled down, i hardly knew how, upon the floor, 
among the faded bridal relics with which it was strewn. i took 
advantage of the moment - i had sought one from the first - to 
leave the room, after beseeching estella's attention to her, with a 
movement of my hand. when i left, estella was yet standing by the 
great chimney-piece, just as she had stood throughout. miss 
havisham's grey hair was all adrift upon the ground, among the 
other bridal wrecks, and was a miserable sight to see. 
it was with a depressed heart that i walked in the starlight for an 
hour and more, about the court-yard, and about the brewery, and 
about the ruined garden. when i at last took courage to return to 
the room, i found estella sitting at miss havisham's knee, taking 
up some stitches in one of those old articles of dress that were 
dropping to pieces, and of which i have often been reminded since 
by the faded tatters of old banners that i have seen hanging up in 
cathedrals. afterwards, estella and i played at cards, as of yore - 
only we were skilful now, and played french games - and so the 
evening wore away, and i went to bed. 
i lay in that separate building across the court-yard. it was the 
first time i had ever lain down to rest in satis house, and sleep 
refused to come near me. a thousand miss havishams haunted me. she 
was on this side of my pillow, on that, at the head of the bed, at 
the foot, behind the half-opened door of the dressing-room, in the 
dressing-room, in the room overhead, in the room beneath - 
everywhere. at last, when the night was slow to creep on towards 
two o'clock, i felt that i absolutely could no longer bear the 
place as a place to lie down in, and that i must get up. i 
therefore got up and put on my clothes, and went out across the 
yard into the long stone passage, designing to gain the outer 
court-yard and walk there for the relief of my mind. but, i was no 
sooner in the passage than i extinguished my candle; for, i saw 
miss havisham going along it in a ghostly manner, making a low cry. 
i followed her at a distance, and saw her go up the staircase. she 
carried a bare candle in her hand, which she had probably taken 
from one of the sconces in her own room, and was a most unearthly 
object by its light. standing at the bottom of the staircase, i 
felt the mildewed air of the feast-chamber, without seeing her open 
the door, and i heard her walking there, and so across into her own 
room, and so across again into that, never ceasing the low cry. 
after a time, i tried in the dark both to get out, and to go back, 
but i could do neither until some streaks of day strayed in and 
showed me where to lay my hands. during the whole interval, 
whenever i went to the bottom of the staircase, i heard her 
footstep, saw her light pass above, and heard her ceaseless low 
cry. 
before we left next day, there was no revival of the difference 
between her and estella, nor was it ever revived on any similar 
occasion; and there were four similar occasions, to the best of my 
remembrance. nor, did miss havisham's manner towards estella in 
anywise change, except that i believed it to have something like 
fear infused among its former characteristics. 
it is impossible to turn this leaf of my life, without putting 
bentley drummle's name upon it; or i would, very gladly. 
on a certain occasion when the finches were assembled in force, and 
when good feeling was being promoted in the usual manner by 
nobody's agreeing with anybody else, the presiding finch called the 
grove to order, forasmuch as mr. drummle had not yet toasted a lady; 
which, according to the solemn constitution of the society, it was 
the brute's turn to do that day. i thought i saw him leer in an 
ugly way at me while the decanters were going round, but as there 
was no love lost between us, that might easily be. what was my 
indignant surprise when he called upon the company to pledge him to 
"estella!" 
"estella who?" said i. 
"never you mind," retorted drummle. 
"estella of where?" said i. "you are bound to say of where." which 
he was, as a finch. 
"of richmond, gentlemen," said drummle, putting me out of the 
question, "and a peerless beauty." 
much he knew about peerless beauties, a mean miserable idiot! i 
whispered herbert. 
"i know that lady," said herbert, across the table, when the toast 
had been honoured. 
"do you?" said drummle. 
"and so do i," i added, with a scarlet face. 
"do you?" said drummle. "oh, lord!" 
this was the only retort - except glass or crockery - that the 
heavy creature was capable of making; but, i became as highly 
incensed by it as if it had been barbed with wit, and i immediately 
rose in my place and said that i could not but regard it as being 
like the honourable finch's impudence to come down to that grove - 
we always talked about coming down to that grove, as a neat 
parliamentary turn of expression - down to that grove, proposing a 
lady of whom he knew nothing. mr. drummle upon this, starting up, 
demanded what i meant by that? whereupon, i made him the extreme 
reply that i believed he knew where i was to be found. 
whether it was possible in a christian country to get on without 
blood, after this, was a question on which the finches were 
divided. the debate upon it grew so lively, indeed, that at least 
six more honourable members told six more, during the discussion, 
that they believed they knew where they were to be found. however, 
it was decided at last (the grove being a court of honour) that if 
mr. drummle would bring never so slight a certificate from the lady, 
importing that he had the honour of her acquaintance, mr. pip must 
express his regret, as a gentleman and a finch, for "having been 
betrayed into a warmth which." next day was appointed for the 
production (lest our honour should take cold from delay), and next 
day drummle appeared with a polite little avowal in estella's hand, 
that she had had the honour of dancing with him several times. this 
left me no course but to regret that i had been "betrayed into a 
warmth which," and on the whole to repudiate, as untenable, the 
idea that i was to be found anywhere. drummle and i then sat 
snorting at one another for an hour, while the grove engaged in 
indiscriminate contradiction, and finally the promotion of good 
feeling was declared to have gone ahead at an amazing rate. 
i tell this lightly, but it was no light thing to me. for, i cannot 
adequately express what pain it gave me to think that estella 
should show any favour to a contemptible, clumsy, sulky booby, so 
very far below the average. to the present moment, i believe it to 
have been referable to some pure fire of generosity and 
disinterestedness in my love for her, that i could not endure the 
thought of her stooping to that hound. no doubt i should have been 
miserable whomsoever she had favoured; but a worthier object would 
have caused me a different kind and degree of distress. 
it was easy for me to find out, and i did soon find out, that 
drummle had begun to follow her closely, and that she allowed him 
to do it. a little while, and he was always in pursuit of her, and 
he and i crossed one another every day. he held on, in a dull 
persistent way, and estella held him on; now with encouragement, 
now with discouragement, now almost flattering him, now openly 
despising him, now knowing him very well, now scarcely remembering 
who he was. 
the spider, as mr. jaggers had called him, was used to lying in 
wait, however, and had the patience of his tribe. added to that, he 
had a blockhead confidence in his money and in his family 
greatness, which sometimes did him good service - almost taking the 
place of concentration and determined purpose. so, the spider, 
doggedly watching estella, outwatched many brighter insects, and 
would often uncoil himself and drop at the right nick of time. 
at a certain assembly ball at richmond (there used to be assembly 
balls at most places then), where estella had outshone all other 
beauties, this blundering drummle so hung about her, and with so 
much toleration on her part, that i resolved to speak to her 
concerning him. i took the next opportunity: which was when she was 
waiting for mrs. brandley to take her home, and was sitting apart 
among some flowers, ready to go. i was with her, for i almost 
always accompanied them to and from such places. 
"are you tired, estella?" 
"rather, pip." 
"you should be." 
"say rather, i should not be; for i have my letter to satis house 
to write, before i go to sleep." 
"recounting to-night's triumph?" said i. "surely a very poor one, 
estella." 
"what do you mean? i didn't know there had been any." 
"estella," said i, "do look at that fellow in the corner yonder, 
who is looking over here at us." 
"why should i look at him?" returned estella, with her eyes on me 
instead. "what is there in that fellow in the corner yonder - to 
use your words - that i need look at?" 
"indeed, that is the very question i want to ask you," said i. "for 
he has been hovering about you all night." 
"moths, and all sorts of ugly creatures," replied estella, with a 
glance towards him, "hover about a lighted candle. can the candle 
help it?" 
"no," i returned; "but cannot the estella help it?" 
"well!" said she, laughing, after a moment, "perhaps. yes. anything 
you like." 
"but, estella, do hear me speak. it makes me wretched that you 
should encourage a man so generally despised as drummle. you know 
he is despised." 
"well?" said she. 
"you know he is as ungainly within, as without. a deficient, 
illtempered, lowering, stupid fellow." 
"well?" said she. 
"you know he has nothing to recommend him but money, and a 
ridiculous roll of addle-headed predecessors; now, don't you?" 
"well?" said she again; and each time she said it, she opened her 
lovely eyes the wider. 
to overcome the difficulty of getting past that monosyllable, i 
took it from her, and said, repeating it with emphasis, "well! then, 
that is why it makes me wretched." 
now, if i could have believed that she favoured drummle with any 
idea of making me - me - wretched, i should have been in better 
heart about it; but in that habitual way of hers, she put me so 
entirely out of the question, that i could believe nothing of the 
kind. 
"pip," said estella, casting her glance over the room, "don't be 
foolish about its effect on you. it may have its effect on others, 
and may be meant to have. it's not worth discussing." 
"yes it is," said i, "because i cannot bear that people should say, 
'she throws away her graces and attractions on a mere boor, the 
lowest in the crowd.'" 
"i can bear it," said estella. 
"oh! don't be so proud, estella, and so inflexible." 
"calls me proud and inflexible in this breath!" said estella, 
opening her hands. "and in his last breath reproached me for 
stooping to a boor!" 
"there is no doubt you do," said i, something hurriedly, "for i 
have seen you give him looks and smiles this very night, such as 
you never give to - me." 
"do you want me then," said estella, turning suddenly with a fixed 
and serious, if not angry, look, "to deceive and entrap you?" 
"do you deceive and entrap him, estella?" 
"yes, and many others - all of them but you. here is mrs. brandley. 
i'll say no more." 
and now that i have given the one chapter to the theme that so 
filled my heart, and so often made it ache and ache again, i pass 
on, unhindered, to the event that had impended over me longer yet; 
the event that had begun to be prepared for, before i knew that the 
world held estella, and in the days when her baby intelligence was 
receiving its first distortions from miss havisham's wasting hands. 
in the eastern story, the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed of 
state in the flush of conquest was slowly wrought out of the 
quarry, the tunnel for the rope to hold it in its place was slowly 
carried through the leagues of rock, the slab was slowly raised and 
fitted in the roof, the rope was rove to it and slowly taken 
through the miles of hollow to the great iron ring. all being made 
ready with much labour, and the hour come, the sultan was aroused 
in the dead of the night, and the sharpened axe that was to sever 
the rope from the great iron ring was put into his hand, and he 
struck with it, and the rope parted and rushed away, and the 
ceiling fell. so, in my case; all the work, near and afar, that 
tended to the end, had been accomplished; and in an instant the 
blow was struck, and the roof of my stronghold dropped upon me. 
chapter 39 
i was three-and-twenty years of age. not another word had i heard 
to enlighten me on the subject of my expectations, and my 
twenty-third birthday was a week gone. we had left barnard's inn 
more than a year, and lived in the temple. our chambers were in 
garden-court, down by the river. 
mr. pocket and i had for some time parted company as to our original 
relations, though we continued on the best terms. notwithstanding my 
inability to settle to anything - which i hope arose out of the 
restless and incomplete tenure on which i held my means - i had a 
taste for reading, and read regularly so many hours a day. that 
matter of herbert's was still progressing, and everything with me 
was as i have brought it down to the close of the last preceding 
chapter. 
business had taken herbert on a journey to marseilles. i was alone, 
and had a dull sense of being alone. dispirited and anxious, long 
hoping that to-morrow or next week would clear my way, and long 
disappointed, i sadly missed the cheerful face and ready response 
of my friend. 
it was wretched weather; stormy and wet, stormy and wet; and mud, 
mud, mud, deep in all the streets. day after day, a vast heavy veil 
had been driving over london from the east, and it drove still, as 
if in the east there were an eternity of cloud and wind. so furious 
had been the gusts, that high buildings in town had had the lead 
stripped off their roofs; and in the country, trees had been torn 
up, and sails of windmills carried away; and gloomy accounts had 
come in from the coast, of shipwreck and death. violent blasts of 
rain had accompanied these rages of wind, and the day just closed 
as i sat down to read had been the worst of all. 
alterations have been made in that part of the temple since that 
time, and it has not now so lonely a character as it had then, nor 
is it so exposed to the river. we lived at the top of the last 
house, and the wind rushing up the river shook the house that 
night, like discharges of cannon, or breakings of a sea. when the 
rain came with it and dashed against the windows, i thought, 
raising my eyes to them as they rocked, that i might have fancied 
myself in a storm-beaten lighthouse. occasionally, the smoke came 
rolling down the chimney as though it could not bear to go out into 
such a night; and when i set the doors open and looked down the 
staircase, the staircase lamps were blown out; and when i shaded my 
face with my hands and looked through the black windows (opening 
them ever so little, was out of the question in the teeth of such 
wind and rain) i saw that the lamps in the court were blown out, 
and that the lamps on the bridges and the shore were shuddering, 
and that the coal fires in barges on the river were being carried 
away before the wind like red-hot splashes in the rain. 
i read with my watch upon the table, purposing to close my book at 
eleven o'clock. as i shut it, saint paul's, and all the many 
church-clocks in the city - some leading, some accompanying, some 
following - struck that hour. the sound was curiously flawed by the 
wind; and i was listening, and thinking how the wind assailed and 
tore it, when i heard a footstep on the stair. 
what nervous folly made me start, and awfully connect it with the 
footstep of my dead sister, matters not. it was past in a moment, 
and i listened again, and heard the footstep stumble in coming on. 
remembering then, that the staircase-lights were blown out, i took 
up my reading-lamp and went out to the stair-head. whoever was 
below had stopped on seeing my lamp, for all was quiet. 
"there is some one down there, is there not?" i called out, looking 
down. 
"yes," said a voice from the darkness beneath. 
"what floor do you want?" 
"the top. mr. pip." 
"that is my name. - there is nothing the matter?" 
"nothing the matter," returned the voice. and the man came on. 
i stood with my lamp held out over the stair-rail, and he came 
slowly within its light. it was a shaded lamp, to shine upon a 
book, and its circle of light was very contracted; so that he was 
in it for a mere instant, and then out of it. in the instant, i had 
seen a face that was strange to me, looking up with an 
incomprehensible air of being touched and pleased by the sight of 
me. 
moving the lamp as the man moved, i made out that he was 
substantially dressed, but roughly; like a voyager by sea. that he 
had long iron-grey hair. that his age was about sixty. that he was 
a muscular man, strong on his legs, and that he was browned and 
hardened by exposure to weather. as he ascended the last stair or 
two, and the light of my lamp included us both, i saw, with a 
stupid kind of amazement, that he was holding out both his hands to 
me. 
"pray what is your business?" i asked him. 
"my business?" he repeated, pausing. "ah! yes. i will explain my 
business, by your leave." 
"do you wish to come in?" 
"yes," he replied; "i wish to come in, master." 
i had asked him the question inhospitably enough, for i resented 
the sort of bright and gratified recognition that still shone in 
his face. i resented it, because it seemed to imply that he 
expected me to respond to it. but, i took him into the room i had 
just left, and, having set the lamp on the table, asked him as 
civilly as i could, to explain himself. 
he looked about him with the strangest air - an air of wondering 
pleasure, as if he had some part in the things he admired - and he 
pulled off a rough outer coat, and his hat. then, i saw that his 
head was furrowed and bald, and that the long iron-grey hair grew 
only on its sides. but, i saw nothing that in the least explained 
him. on the contrary, i saw him next moment, once more holding out 
both his hands to me. 
"what do you mean?" said i, half suspecting him to be mad. 
he stopped in his looking at me, and slowly rubbed his right hand 
over his head. "it's disapinting to a man," he said, in a coarse 
broken voice, "arter having looked for'ard so distant, and come so 
fur; but you're not to blame for that - neither on us is to blame 
for that. i'll speak in half a minute. give me half a minute, 
please." 
he sat down on a chair that stood before the fire, and covered his 
forehead with his large brown veinous hands. i looked at him 
attentively then, and recoiled a little from him; but i did not 
know him. 
"there's no one nigh," said he, looking over his shoulder; "is 
there?" 
"why do you, a stranger coming into my rooms at this time of the 
night, ask that question?" said i. 
"you're a game one," he returned, shaking his head at me with a 
deliberate affection, at once most unintelligible and most 
exasperating; "i'm glad you've grow'd up, a game one! but don't 
catch hold of me. you'd be sorry arterwards to have done it." 
i relinquished the intention he had detected, for i knew him! even 
yet, i could not recall a single feature, but i knew him! if the 
wind and the rain had driven away the intervening years, had 
scattered all the intervening objects, had swept us to the 
churchyard where we first stood face to face on such different 
levels, i could not have known my convict more distinctly than i 
knew him now as he sat in the chair before the fire. no need to 
take a file from his pocket and show it to me; no need to take the 
handkerchief from his neck and twist it round his head; no need to 
hug himself with both his arms, and take a shivering turn across 
the room, looking back at me for recognition. i knew him before he 
gave me one of those aids, though, a moment before, i had not been 
conscious of remotely suspecting his identity. 
he came back to where i stood, and again held out both his hands. 
not knowing what to do - for, in my astonishment i had lost my 
self-possession - i reluctantly gave him my hands. he grasped them 
heartily, raised them to his lips, kissed them, and still held 
them. 
"you acted noble, my boy," said he. "noble, pip! and i have never 
forgot it!" 
at a change in his manner as if he were even going to embrace me, i 
laid a hand upon his breast and put him away. 
"stay!" said i. "keep off! if you are grateful to me for what i did 
when i was a little child, i hope you have shown your gratitude by 
mending your way of life. if you have come here to thank me, it was 
not necessary. still, however you have found me out, there must be 
something good in the feeling that has brought you here, and i will 
not repulse you; but surely you must understand that - i-" 
my attention was so attracted by the singularity of his fixed look 
at me, that the words died away on my tongue. 
"you was a saying," he observed, when we had confronted one another 
in silence, "that surely i must understand. what, surely must i 
understand?" 
"that i cannot wish to renew that chance intercourse with you of 
long ago, under these different circumstances. i am glad to believe 
you have repented and recovered yourself. i am glad to tell you so. 
i am glad that, thinking i deserve to be thanked, you have come to 
thank me. but our ways are different ways, none the less. you are 
wet, and you look weary. will you drink something before you go?" 
he had replaced his neckerchief loosely, and had stood, keenly 
observant of me, biting a long end of it. "i think," he answered, 
still with the end at his mouth and still observant of me, "that i 
will drink (i thank you) afore i go." 
there was a tray ready on a side-table. i brought it to the table 
near the fire, and asked him what he would have? he touched one of 
the bottles without looking at it or speaking, and i made him some 
hot rum-and-water. i tried to keep my hand steady while i did so, 
but his look at me as he leaned back in his chair with the long 
draggled end of his neckerchief between his teeth - evidently 
forgotten - made my hand very difficult to master. when at last i 
put the glass to him, i saw with amazement that his eyes were full 
of tears. 
up to this time i had remained standing, not to disguise that i 
wished him gone. but i was softened by the softened aspect of the 
man, and felt a touch of reproach. "i hope," said i, hurriedly 
putting something into a glass for myself, and drawing a chair to 
the table, "that you will not think i spoke harshly to you just 
now. i had no intention of doing it, and i am sorry for it if i 
did. i wish you well, and happy!" 
as i put my glass to my lips, he glanced with surprise at the end 
of his neckerchief, dropping from his mouth when he opened it, and 
stretched out his hand. i gave him mine, and then he drank, and 
drew his sleeve across his eyes and forehead. 
"how are you living?" i asked him. 
"i've been a sheep-farmer, stock-breeder, other trades besides, 
away in the new world," said he: "many a thousand mile of stormy 
water off from this." 
"i hope you have done well?" 
"i've done wonderfully well. there's others went out alonger me as 
has done well too, but no man has done nigh as well as me. i'm 
famous for it." 
"i am glad to hear it." 
"i hope to hear you say so, my dear boy." 
without stopping to try to understand those words or the tone in 
which they were spoken, i turned off to a point that had just come 
into my mind. 
"have you ever seen a messenger you once sent to me," i inquired, 
"since he undertook that trust?" 
"never set eyes upon him. i warn't likely to it." 
"he came faithfully, and he brought me the two one-pound notes. i 
was a poor boy then, as you know, and to a poor boy they were a 
little fortune. but, like you, i have done well since, and you must 
let me pay them back. you can put them to some other poor boy's 
use." i took out my purse. 
he watched me as i laid my purse upon the table and opened it, and 
he watched me as i separated two one-pound notes from its contents. 
they were clean and new, and i spread them out and handed them over 
to him. still watching me, he laid them one upon the other, folded 
them long-wise, gave them a twist, set fire to them at the lamp, 
and dropped the ashes into the tray. 
"may i make so bold," he said then, with a smile that was like a 
frown, and with a frown that was like a smile, "as ask you how you 
have done well, since you and me was out on them lone shivering 
marshes?" 
"how?" 
"ah!" 
he emptied his glass, got up, and stood at the side of the fire, 
with his heavy brown hand on the mantelshelf. he put a foot up to 
the bars, to dry and warm it, and the wet boot began to steam; but, 
he neither looked at it, nor at the fire, but steadily looked at 
me. it was only now that i began to tremble. 
when my lips had parted, and had shaped some words that were 
without sound, i forced myself to tell him (though i could not do 
it distinctly), that i had been chosen to succeed to some property. 
"might a mere warmint ask what property?" said he. 
i faltered, "i don't know." 
"might a mere warmint ask whose property?" said he. 
i faltered again, "i don't know." 
"could i make a guess, i wonder," said the convict, "at your income 
since you come of age! as to the first figure now. five?" 
with my heart beating like a heavy hammer of disordered action, i 
rose out of my chair, and stood with my hand upon the back of it, 
looking wildly at him. 
"concerning a guardian," he went on. "there ought to have been some 
guardian, or such-like, whiles you was a minor. some lawyer, maybe. 
as to the first letter of that lawyer's name now. would it be j?" 
all the truth of my position came flashing on me; and its 
disappointments, dangers, disgraces, consequences of all kinds, 
rushed in in such a multitude that i was borne down by them and had 
to struggle for every breath i drew. 
"put it," he resumed, "as the employer of that lawyer whose name 
begun with a j, and might be jaggers - put it as he had come over 
sea to portsmouth, and had landed there, and had wanted to come on 
to you. 'however, you have found me out,' you says just now. well! 
however, did i find you out? why, i wrote from portsmouth to a 
person in london, for particulars of your address. that person's 
name? why, wemmick." 
i could not have spoken one word, though it had been to save my 
life. i stood, with a hand on the chair-back and a hand on my 
breast, where i seemed to be suffocating - i stood so, looking 
wildly at him, until i grasped at the chair, when the room began to 
surge and turn. he caught me, drew me to the sofa, put me up 
against the cushions, and bent on one knee before me: bringing the 
face that i now well remembered, and that i shuddered at, very near 
to mine. 
"yes, pip, dear boy, i've made a gentleman on you! it's me wot has 
done it! i swore that time, sure as ever i earned a guinea, that 
guinea should go to you. i swore arterwards, sure as ever i 
spec'lated and got rich, you should get rich. i lived rough, that 
you should live smooth; i worked hard, that you should be above 
work. what odds, dear boy? do i tell it, fur you to feel a 
obligation? not a bit. i tell it, fur you to know as that there 
hunted dunghill dog wot you kep life in, got his head so high that 
he could make a gentleman - and, pip, you're him!" 
the abhorrence in which i held the man, the dread i had of him, the 
repugnance with which i shrank from him, could not have been 
exceeded if he had been some terrible beast. 
"look'ee here, pip. i'm your second father. you're my son - more to 
me nor any son. i've put away money, only for you to spend. when i 
was a hired-out shepherd in a solitary hut, not seeing no faces but 
faces of sheep till i half forgot wot men's and women's faces wos 
like, i see yourn. i drops my knife many a time in that hut when i 
was a-eating my dinner or my supper, and i says, 'here's the boy 
again, a-looking at me whiles i eats and drinks!' i see you there a 
many times, as plain as ever i see you on them misty marshes. 'lord 
strike me dead!' i says each time - and i goes out in the air to 
say it under the open heavens - 'but wot, if i gets liberty and 
money, i'll make that boy a gentleman!' and i done it. why, look at 
you, dear boy! look at these here lodgings o'yourn, fit for a lord! 
a lord? ah! you shall show money with lords for wagers, and beat 
'em!" 
in his heat and triumph, and in his knowledge that i had been 
nearly fainting, he did not remark on my reception of all this. it 
was the one grain of relief i had. 
"look'ee here!" he went on, taking my watch out of my pocket, and 
turning towards him a ring on my finger, while i recoiled from his 
touch as if he had been a snake, "a gold 'un and a beauty: that's a 
gentleman's, i hope! a diamond all set round with rubies; that's a 
gentleman's, i hope! look at your linen; fine and beautiful! look 
at your clothes; better ain't to be got! and your books too," 
turning his eyes round the room, "mounting up, on their shelves, by 
hundreds! and you read 'em; don't you? i see you'd been a reading 
of 'em when i come in. ha, ha, ha! you shall read 'em to me, dear 
boy! and if they're in foreign languages wot i don't understand, i 
shall be just as proud as if i did." 
again he took both my hands and put them to his lips, while my 
blood ran cold within me. 
"don't you mind talking, pip," said he, after again drawing his 
sleeve over his eyes and forehead, as the click came in his throat 
which i well remembered - and he was all the more horrible to me 
that he was so much in earnest; "you can't do better nor keep 
quiet, dear boy. you ain't looked slowly forward to this as i have; 
you wosn't prepared for this, as i wos. but didn't you never think 
it might be me?" 
"o no, no, no," i returned, "never, never!" 
"well, you see it wos me, and single-handed. never a soul in it but 
my own self and mr. jaggers." 
"was there no one else?" i asked. 
"no," said he, with a glance of surprise: "who else should there 
be? and, dear boy, how good looking you have growed! there's bright 
eyes somewheres - eh? isn't there bright eyes somewheres, wot you 
love the thoughts on?" 
o estella, estella! 
"they shall be yourn, dear boy, if money can buy 'em. not that a 
gentleman like you, so well set up as you, can't win 'em off of his 
own game; but money shall back you! let me finish wot i was a- 
telling you, dear boy. from that there hut and that there 
hiring-out, i got money left me by my master (which died, and had 
been the same as me), and got my liberty and went for myself. in 
every single thing i went for, i went for you. 'lord strike a 
blight upon it,' i says, wotever it was i went for, 'if it ain't 
for him!' it all prospered wonderful. as i giv' you to understand 
just now, i'm famous for it. it was the money left me, and the 
gains of the first few year wot i sent home to mr. jaggers - all for 
you - when he first come arter you, agreeable to my letter." 
o, that he had never come! that he had left me at the forge - far 
from contented, yet, by comparison happy! 
"and then, dear boy, it was a recompense to me, look'ee here, to 
know in secret that i was making a gentleman. the blood horses of 
them colonists might fling up the dust over me as i was walking; 
what do i say? i says to myself, 'i'm making a better gentleman nor 
ever you'll be!' when one of 'em says to another, 'he was a 
convict, a few year ago, and is a ignorant common fellow now, for 
all he's lucky,' what do i say? i says to myself, 'if i ain't a 
gentleman, nor yet ain't got no learning, i'm the owner of such. 
all on you owns stock and land; which on you owns a brought-up 
london gentleman?' this way i kep myself a-going. and this way i 
held steady afore my mind that i would for certain come one day and 
see my boy, and make myself known to him, on his own ground." 
he laid his hand on my shoulder. i shuddered at the thought that 
for anything i knew, his hand might be stained with blood. 
"it warn't easy, pip, for me to leave them parts, nor yet it warn't 
safe. but i held to it, and the harder it was, the stronger i held, 
for i was determined, and my mind firm made up. at last i done it. 
dear boy, i done it!" 
i tried to collect my thoughts, but i was stunned. throughout, i 
had seemed to myself to attend more to the wind and the rain than 
to him; even now, i could not separate his voice from those voices, 
though those were loud and his was silent. 
"where will you put me?" he asked, presently. "i must be put 
somewheres, dear boy." 
"to sleep?" said i. 
"yes. and to sleep long and sound," he answered; "for i've been 
sea-tossed and sea-washed, months and months." 
"my friend and companion," said i, rising from the sofa, "is 
absent; you must have his room." 
"he won't come back to-morrow; will he?" 
"no," said i, answering almost mechanically, in spite of my utmost 
efforts; "not to-morrow." 
"because, look'ee here, dear boy," he said, dropping his voice, and 
laying a long finger on my breast in an impressive manner, "caution 
is necessary." 
"how do you mean? caution?" 
"by g - , it's death!" 
"what's death?" 
"i was sent for life. it's death to come back. there's been 
overmuch coming back of late years, and i should of a certainty be 
hanged if took." 
nothing was needed but this; the wretched man, after loading 
wretched me with his gold and silver chains for years, had risked 
his life to come to me, and i held it there in my keeping! if i had 
loved him instead of abhorring him; if i had been attracted to him 
by the strongest admiration and affection, instead of shrinking 
from him with the strongest repugnance; it could have been no 
worse. on the contrary, it would have been better, for his 
preservation would then have naturally and tenderly addressed my 
heart. 
my first care was to close the shutters, so that no light might be 
seen from without, and then to close and make fast the doors. while 
i did so, he stood at the table drinking rum and eating biscuit; 
and when i saw him thus engaged, i saw my convict on the marshes at 
his meal again. it almost seemed to me as if he must stoop down 
presently, to file at his leg. 
when i had gone into herbert's room, and had shut off any other 
communication between it and the staircase than through the room in 
which our conversation had been held, i asked him if he would go to 
bed? he said yes, but asked me for some of my "gentleman's linen" 
to put on in the morning. i brought it out, and laid it ready for 
him, and my blood again ran cold when he again took me by both 
hands to give me good night. 
i got away from him, without knowing how i did it, and mended the 
fire in the room where we had been together, and sat down by it, 
afraid to go to bed. for an hour or more, i remained too stunned to 
think; and it was not until i began to think, that i began fully to 
know how wrecked i was, and how the ship in which i had sailed was 
gone to pieces. 
miss havisham's intentions towards me, all a mere dream; estella 
not designed for me; i only suffered in satis house as a 
convenience, a sting for the greedy relations, a model with a 
mechanical heart to practise on when no other practice was at hand; 
those were the first smarts i had. but, sharpest and deepest pain 
of all - it was for the convict, guilty of i knew not what crimes, 
and liable to be taken out of those rooms where i sat thinking, and 
hanged at the old bailey door, that i had deserted joe. 
i would not have gone back to joe now, i would not have gone back 
to biddy now, for any consideration: simply, i suppose, because my 
sense of my own worthless conduct to them was greater than every 
consideration. no wisdom on earth could have given me the comfort 
that i should have derived from their simplicity and fidelity; but 
i could never, never, undo what i had done. 
in every rage of wind and rush of rain, i heard pursuers. twice, i 
could have sworn there was a knocking and whispering at the outer 
door. with these fears upon me, i began either to imagine or recall 
that i had had mysterious warnings of this man's approach. that, 
for weeks gone by, i had passed faces in the streets which i had 
thought like his. that, these likenesses had grown more numerous, 
as he, coming over the sea, had drawn nearer. that, his wicked 
spirit had somehow sent these messengers to mine, and that now on 
this stormy night he was as good as his word, and with me. 
crowding up with these reflections came the reflection that i had 
seen him with my childish eyes to be a desperately violent man; 
that i had heard that other convict reiterate that he had tried to 
murder him; that i had seen him down in the ditch tearing and 
fighting like a wild beast. out of such remembrances i brought into 
the light of the fire, a half-formed terror that it might not be 
safe to be shut up there with him in the dead of the wild solitary 
night. this dilated until it filled the room, and impelled me to 
take a candle and go in and look at my dreadful burden. 
he had rolled a handkerchief round his head, and his face was set 
and lowering in his sleep. but he was asleep, and quietly too, 
though he had a pistol lying on the pillow. assured of this, i 
softly removed the key to the outside of his door, and turned it on 
him before i again sat down by the fire. gradually i slipped from 
the chair and lay on the floor. when i awoke, without having parted 
in my sleep with the perception of my wretchedness, the clocks of 
the eastward churches were striking five, the candles were wasted 
out, the fire was dead, and the wind and rain intensified the thick 
black darkness. 
this is the end of the second stage of pip's expectations. 
chapter 40 
it was fortunate for me that i had to take precautions to ensure 
(so far as i could) the safety of my dreaded visitor; for, this 
thought pressing on me when i awoke, held other thoughts in a 
confused concourse at a distance. 
the impossibility of keeping him concealed in the chambers was 
self-evident. it could not be done, and the attempt to do it would 
inevitably engender suspicion. true, i had no avenger in my service 
now, but i was looked after by an inflammatory old female, assisted 
by an animated rag-bag whom she called her niece, and to keep a 
room secret from them would be to invite curiosity and 
exaggeration. they both had weak eyes, which i had long attributed 
to their chronically looking in at keyholes, and they were always 
at hand when not wanted; indeed that was their only reliable 
quality besides larceny. not to get up a mystery with these people, 
i resolved to announce in the morning that my uncle had 
unexpectedly come from the country. 
this course i decided on while i was yet groping about in the 
darkness for the means of getting a light. not stumbling on the 
means after all, i was fain to go out to the adjacent lodge and get 
the watchman there to come with his lantern. now, in groping my way 
down the black staircase i fell over something, and that something 
was a man crouching in a corner. 
as the man made no answer when i asked him what he did there, but 
eluded my touch in silence, i ran to the lodge and urged the 
watchman to come quickly: telling him of the incident on the way 
back. the wind being as fierce as ever, we did not care to endanger 
the light in the lantern by rekindling the extinguished lamps on 
the staircase, but we examined the staircase from the bottom to the 
top and found no one there. it then occurred to me as possible that 
the man might have slipped into my rooms; so, lighting my candle at 
the watchman's, and leaving him standing at the door, i examined 
them carefully, including the room in which my dreaded guest lay 
asleep. all was quiet, and assuredly no other man was in those 
chambers. 
it troubled me that there should have been a lurker on the stairs, 
on that night of all nights in the year, and i asked the watchman, 
on the chance of eliciting some hopeful explanation as i handed him 
a dram at the door, whether he had admitted at his gate any 
gentleman who had perceptibly been dining out? yes, he said; at 
different times of the night, three. one lived in fountain court, 
and the other two lived in the lane, and he had seen them all go 
home. again, the only other man who dwelt in the house of which my 
chambers formed a part, had been in the country for some weeks; and 
he certainly had not returned in the night, because we had seen his 
door with his seal on it as we came up-stairs. 
"the night being so bad, sir," said the watchman, as he gave me 
back my glass, "uncommon few have come in at my gate. besides them 
three gentlemen that i have named, i don't call to mind another 
since about eleven o'clock, when a stranger asked for you." 
"my uncle," i muttered. "yes." 
"you saw him, sir?" 
"yes. oh yes." 
"likewise the person with him?" 
"person with him!" i repeated. 
"i judged the person to be with him," returned the watchman. "the 
person stopped, when he stopped to make inquiry of me, and the 
person took this way when he took this way." 
"what sort of person?" 
the watchman had not particularly noticed; he should say a working 
person; to the best of his belief, he had a dust-coloured kind of 
clothes on, under a dark coat. the watchman made more light of the 
matter than i did, and naturally; not having my reason for 
attaching weight to it. 
when i had got rid of him, which i thought it well to do without 
prolonging explanations, my mind was much troubled by these two 
circumstances taken together. whereas they were easy of innocent 
solution apart - as, for instance, some diner-out or diner-at-home, 
who had not gone near this watchman's gate, might have strayed to 
my staircase and dropped asleep there - and my nameless visitor 
might have brought some one with him to show him the way - still, 
joined, they had an ugly look to one as prone to distrust and fear 
as the changes of a few hours had made me. 
i lighted my fire, which burnt with a raw pale flare at that time 
of the morning, and fell into a doze before it. i seemed to have 
been dozing a whole night when the clocks struck six. as there was 
full an hour and a half between me and daylight, i dozed again; 
now, waking up uneasily, with prolix conversations about nothing, 
in my ears; now, making thunder of the wind in the chimney; at 
length, falling off into a profound sleep from which the daylight 
woke me with a start. 
all this time i had never been able to consider my own situation, 
nor could i do so yet. i had not the power to attend to it. i was 
greatly dejected and distressed, but in an incoherent wholesale 
sort of way. as to forming any plan for the future, i could as soon 
have formed an elephant. when i opened the shutters and looked out 
at the wet wild morning, all of a leaden hue; when i walked from 
room to room; when i sat down again shivering, before the fire, 
waiting for my laundress to appear; i thought how miserable i was, 
but hardly knew why, or how long i had been so, or on what day of 
the week i made the reflection, or even who i was that made it. 
at last, the old woman and the niece came in - the latter with a 
head not easily distinguishable from her dusty broom - and 
testified surprise at sight of me and the fire. to whom i imparted 
how my uncle had come in the night and was then asleep, and how the 
breakfast preparations were to be modified accordingly. then, i 
washed and dressed while they knocked the furniture about and made 
a dust; and so, in a sort of dream or sleep-waking, i found myself 
sitting by the fire again, waiting for - him - to come to 
breakfast. 
by-and-by, his door opened and he came out. i could not bring 
myself to bear the sight of him, and i thought he had a worse look 
by daylight. 
"i do not even know," said i, speaking low as he took his seat at 
the table, "by what name to call you. i have given out that you are 
my uncle." 
"that's it, dear boy! call me uncle." 
"you assumed some name, i suppose, on board ship?" 
"yes, dear boy. i took the name of provis." 
"do you mean to keep that name?" 
"why, yes, dear boy, it's as good as another - unless you'd like 
another." 
"what is your real name?" i asked him in a whisper. 
"magwitch," he answered, in the same tone; "chrisen'd abel." 
"what were you brought up to be?" 
"a warmint, dear boy." 
he answered quite seriously, and used the word as if it denoted 
some profession. 
"when you came into the temple last night-" said i, pausing to 
wonder whether that could really have been last night, which seemed 
so long ago. 
"yes, dear boy?" 
"when you came in at the gate and asked the watchman the way here, 
had you any one with you?" 
"with me? no, dear boy." 
"but there was some one there?" 
"i didn't take particular notice," he said, dubiously, "not knowing 
the ways of the place. but i think there was a person, too, come in 
alonger me." 
"are you known in london?" 
"i hope not!" said he, giving his neck a jerk with his forefinger 
that made me turn hot and sick. 
"were you known in london, once?" 
"not over and above, dear boy. i was in the provinces mostly." 
"were you - tried - in london?" 
"which time?" said he, with a sharp look. 
"the last time." 
he nodded. "first knowed mr. jaggers that way. jaggers was for me." 
it was on my lips to ask him what he was tried for, but he took up 
a knife, gave it a flourish, and with the words, "and what i done 
is worked out and paid for!" fell to at his breakfast. 
he ate in a ravenous way that was very disagreeable, and all his 
actions were uncouth, noisy, and greedy. some of his teeth had 
failed him since i saw him eat on the marshes, and as he turned his 
food in his mouth, and turned his head sideways to bring his 
strongest fangs to bear upon it, he looked terribly like a hungry old 
dog. if i had begun with any appetite, he would have taken it away, 
and i should have sat much as i did - repelled from him by an 
insurmountable aversion, and gloomily looking at the cloth. 
"i'm a heavy grubber, dear boy," he said, as a polite kind of 
apology when he made an end of his meal, "but i always was. if it 
had been in my constitution to be a lighter grubber, i might ha' 
got into lighter trouble. similarly, i must have my smoke. when i 
was first hired out as shepherd t'other side the world, it's my 
belief i should ha' turned into a molloncolly-mad sheep myself, if 
i hadn't a had my smoke." 
as he said so, he got up from the table, and putting his hand into the 
breast of the pea-coat he wore, brought out a short black pipe, and 
a handful of loose tobacco of the kind that is called negro-head. 
having filled his pipe, he put the surplus tobacco back again, as 
if his pocket were a drawer. then, he took a live coal from the 
fire with the tongs, and lighted his pipe at it, and then turned 
round on the hearth-rug with his back to the fire, and went through 
his favourite action of holding out both his hands for mine. 
"and this," said he, dandling my hands up and down in his, as he 
puffed at his pipe; "and this is the gentleman what i made! the 
real genuine one! it does me good fur to look at you, pip. all i 
stip'late, is, to stand by and look at you, dear boy!" 
i released my hands as soon as i could, and found that i was 
beginning slowly to settle down to the contemplation of my 
condition. what i was chained to, and how heavily, became 
intelligible to me, as i heard his hoarse voice, and sat looking up 
at his furrowed bald head with its iron grey hair at the sides. 
"i mustn't see my gentleman a footing it in the mire of the 
streets; there mustn't be no mud on his boots. my gentleman must 
have horses, pip! horses to ride, and horses to drive, and horses 
for his servant to ride and drive as well. shall colonists have 
their horses (and blood 'uns, if you please, good lord!) and not my 
london gentleman? no, no. we'll show 'em another pair of shoes than 
that, pip; won't us?" 
he took out of his pocket a great thick pocket-book, bursting with 
papers, and tossed it on the table. 
"there's something worth spending in that there book, dear boy. 
it's yourn. all i've got ain't mine; it's yourn. don't you be 
afeerd on it. there's more where that come from. i've come to the 
old country fur to see my gentleman spend his money like a 
gentleman. that'll be my pleasure. my pleasure 'ull be fur to see 
him do it. and blast you all!" he wound up, looking round the room 
and snapping his fingers once with a loud snap, "blast you every 
one, from the judge in his wig, to the colonist a stirring up the 
dust, i'll show a better gentleman than the whole kit on you put 
together!" 
"stop!" said i, almost in a frenzy of fear and dislike, "i want to 
speak to you. i want to know what is to be done. i want to know how 
you are to be kept out of danger, how long you are going to stay, 
what projects you have." 
"look'ee here, pip," said he, laying his hand on my arm in a 
suddenly altered and subdued manner; "first of all, look'ee here. i 
forgot myself half a minute ago. what i said was low; that's what 
it was; low. look'ee here, pip. look over it. i ain't a-going to be 
low." 
"first," i resumed, half-groaning, "what precautions can be taken 
against your being recognized and seized?" 
"no, dear boy," he said, in the same tone as before, "that don't go 
first. lowness goes first. i ain't took so many years to make a 
gentleman, not without knowing what's due to him. look'ee here, 
pip. i was low; that's what i was; low. look over it, dear boy." 
some sense of the grimly-ludicrous moved me to a fretful laugh, as 
i replied, "i have looked over it. in heaven's name, don't harp 
upon it!" 
"yes, but look'ee here," he persisted. "dear boy, i ain't come so 
fur, not fur to be low. now, go on, dear boy. you was a-saying-" 
"how are you to be guarded from the danger you have incurred?" 
"well, dear boy, the danger ain't so great. without i was informed 
agen, the danger ain't so much to signify. there's jaggers, and 
there's wemmick, and there's you. who else is there to inform?" 
"is there no chance person who might identify you in the street?" 
said i. 
"well," he returned, "there ain't many. nor yet i don't intend to 
advertise myself in the newspapers by the name of a. m. come back 
from botany bay; and years have rolled away, and who's to gain by 
it? still, look'ee here, pip. if the danger had been fifty times as 
great, i should ha' come to see you, mind you, just the same." 
"and how long do you remain?" 
"how long?" said he, taking his black pipe from his mouth, and 
dropping his jaw as he stared at me. "i'm not a-going back. i've 
come for good." 
"where are you to live?" said i. "what is to be done with you? 
where will you be safe?" 
"dear boy," he returned, "there's disguising wigs can be bought for 
money, and there's hair powder, and spectacles, and black clothes - 
shorts and what not. others has done it safe afore, and what others 
has done afore, others can do agen. as to the where and how of 
living, dear boy, give me your own opinions on it." 
"you take it smoothly now," said i, "but you were very serious last 
night, when you swore it was death." 
"and so i swear it is death," said he, putting his pipe back in his 
mouth, "and death by the rope, in the open street not fur from 
this, and it's serious that you should fully understand it to be 
so. what then, when that's once done? here i am. to go back now, 
'ud be as bad as to stand ground - worse. besides, pip, i'm here, 
because i've meant it by you, years and years. as to what i dare, 
i'm a old bird now, as has dared all manner of traps since first he 
was fledged, and i'm not afeerd to perch upon a scarecrow. if 
there's death hid inside of it, there is, and let him come out, and 
i'll face him, and then i'll believe in him and not afore. and now 
let me have a look at my gentleman agen." 
once more, he took me by both hands and surveyed me with an air of 
admiring proprietorship: smoking with great complacency all the 
while. 
it appeared to me that i could do no better than secure him some 
quiet lodging hard by, of which he might take possession when 
herbert returned: whom i expected in two or three days. that the 
secret must be confided to herbert as a matter of unavoidable 
necessity, even if i could have put the immense relief i should 
derive from sharing it with him out of the question, was plain to 
me. but it was by no means so plain to mr. provis (i resolved to 
call him by that name), who reserved his consent to herbert's 
participation until he should have seen him and formed a favourable 
judgment of his physiognomy. "and even then, dear boy," said he, 
pulling a greasy little clasped black testament out of his pocket, 
"we'll have him on his oath." 
to state that my terrible patron carried this little black book 
about the world solely to swear people on in cases of emergency, 
would be to state what i never quite established - but this i can 
say, that i never knew him put it to any other use. the book itself 
had the appearance of having been stolen from some court of 
justice, and perhaps his knowledge of its antecedents, combined 
with his own experience in that wise, gave him a reliance on its 
powers as a sort of legal spell or charm. on this first occasion of 
his producing it, i recalled how he had made me swear fidelity in 
the churchyard long ago, and how he had described himself last 
night as always swearing to his resolutions in his solitude. 
as he was at present dressed in a seafaring slop suit, in which he 
looked as if he had some parrots and cigars to dispose of, i next 
discussed with him what dress he should wear. he cherished an 
extraordinary belief in the virtues of "shorts" as a disguise, and 
had in his own mind sketched a dress for himself that would have 
made him something between a dean and a dentist. it was with 
considerable difficulty that i won him over to the assumption of a 
dress more like a prosperous farmer's; and we arranged that he 
should cut his hair close, and wear a little powder. lastly, as he 
had not yet been seen by the laundress or her niece, he was to keep 
himself out of their view until his change of dress was made. 
it would seem a simple matter to decide on these precautions; but 
in my dazed, not to say distracted, state, it took so long, that i 
did not get out to further them, until two or three in the 
afternoon. he was to remain shut up in the chambers while i was 
gone, and was on no account to open the door. 
there being to my knowledge a respectable lodging-house in 
essex-street, the back of which looked into the temple, and was 
almost within hail of my windows, i first of all repaired to that 
house, and was so fortunate as to secure the second floor for my 
uncle, mr. provis. i then went from shop to shop, making such 
purchases as were necessary to the change in his appearance. this 
business transacted, i turned my face, on my own account, to little 
britain. mr. jaggers was at his desk, but, seeing me enter, got up 
immediately and stood before his fire. 
"now, pip," said he, "be careful." 
"i will, sir," i returned. for, coming along i had thought well of 
what i was going to say. 
"don't commit yourself," said mr. jaggers, "and don't commit any 
one. you understand - any one. don't tell me anything: i don't want 
to know anything; i am not curious." 
of course i saw that he knew the man was come. 
"i merely want, mr. jaggers," said i, "to assure myself that what i 
have been told, is true. i have no hope of its being untrue, but at 
least i may verify it." 
mr. jaggers nodded. "but did you say 'told' or 'informed'?" he asked 
me, with his head on one side, and not looking at me, but looking 
in a listening way at the floor. "told would seem to imply verbal 
communication. you can't have verbal communication with a man in 
new south wales, you know." 
"i will say, informed, mr. jaggers." 
"good." 
"i have been informed by a person named abel magwitch, that he is 
the benefactor so long unknown to me." 
"that is the man," said mr. jaggers, " - in new south wales." 
"and only he?" said i. 
"and only he," said mr. jaggers. 
"i am not so unreasonable, sir, as to think you at all responsible 
for my mistakes and wrong conclusions; but i always supposed it was 
miss havisham." 
"as you say, pip," returned mr. jaggers, turning his eyes upon me 
coolly, and taking a bite at his forefinger, "i am not at all 
responsible for that." 
"and yet it looked so like it, sir," i pleaded with a downcast 
heart. 
"not a particle of evidence, pip," said mr. jaggers, shaking his 
head and gathering up his skirts. "take nothing on its looks; take 
everything on evidence. there's no better rule." 
"i have no more to say," said i, with a sigh, after standing silent 
for a little while. "i have verified my information, and there's an 
end." 
"and magwitch - in new south wales - having at last disclosed 
himself," said mr. jaggers, "you will comprehend, pip, how rigidly 
throughout my communication with you, i have always adhered to the 
strict line of fact. there has never been the least departure from 
the strict line of fact. you are quite aware of that?" 
"quite, sir." 
"i communicated to magwitch - in new south wales - when he first 
wrote to me - from new south wales - the caution that he must not 
expect me ever to deviate from the strict line of fact. i also 
communicated to him another caution. he appeared to me to have 
obscurely hinted in his letter at some distant idea he had of 
seeing you in england here. i cautioned him that i must hear no 
more of that; that he was not at all likely to obtain a pardon; 
that he was expatriated for the term of his natural life; and that 
his presenting himself in this country would be an act of felony, 
rendering him liable to the extreme penalty of the law. i gave 
magwitch that caution," said mr. jaggers, looking hard at me; "i 
wrote it to new south wales. he guided himself by it, no doubt." 
"no doubt," said i. 
"i have been informed by wemmick," pursued mr. jaggers, still 
looking hard at me, "that he has received a letter, under date 
portsmouth, from a colonist of the name of purvis, or-" 
"or provis," i suggested. 
"or provis - thank you, pip. perhaps it is provis? perhaps you know 
it's provis?" 
"yes," said i. 
"you know it's provis. a letter, under date portsmouth, from a 
colonist of the name of provis, asking for the particulars of your 
address, on behalf of magwitch. wemmick sent him the particulars, i 
understand, by return of post. probably it is through provis that 
you have received the explanation of magwitch - in new south 
wales?" 
"it came through provis," i replied. 
"good day, pip," said mr. jaggers, offering his hand; "glad to have 
seen you. in writing by post to magwitch - in new south wales - or 
in communicating with him through provis, have the goodness to 
mention that the particulars and vouchers of our long account shall 
be sent to you, together with the balance; for there is still a 
balance remaining. good day, pip!" 
we shook hands, and he looked hard at me as long as he could see 
me. i turned at the door, and he was still looking hard at me, 
while the two vile casts on the shelf seemed to be trying to get 
their eyelids open, and to force out of their swollen throats, "o, 
what a man he is!" 
wemmick was out, and though he had been at his desk he could have 
done nothing for me. i went straight back to the temple, where i 
found the terrible provis drinking rum-and-water and smoking 
negro-head, in safety. 
next day the clothes i had ordered, all came home, and he put them 
on. whatever he put on, became him less (it dismally seemed to me) 
than what he had worn before. to my thinking, there was something 
in him that made it hopeless to attempt to disguise him. the more i 
dressed him and the better i dressed him, the more he looked like 
the slouching fugitive on the marshes. this effect on my anxious 
fancy was partly referable, no doubt, to his old face and manner 
growing more familiar to me; but i believe too that he dragged one 
of his legs as if there were still a weight of iron on it, and that 
from head to foot there was convict in the very grain of the man. 
the influences of his solitary hut-life were upon him besides, and 
gave him a savage air that no dress could tame; added to these, 
were the influences of his subsequent branded life among men, and, 
crowning all, his consciousness that he was dodging and hiding now. 
in all his ways of sitting and standing, and eating and drinking - 
of brooding about, in a high-shouldered reluctant style - of taking 
out his great horn-handled jack-knife and wiping it on his legs and 
cutting his food - of lifting light glasses and cups to his lips, 
as if they were clumsy pannikins - of chopping a wedge off his 
bread, and soaking up with it the last fragments of gravy round and 
round his plate, as if to make the most of an allowance, and then 
drying his finger-ends on it, and then swallowing it - in these 
ways and a thousand other small nameless instances arising every 
minute in the day, there was prisoner, felon, bondsman, plain as 
plain could be. 
it had been his own idea to wear that touch of powder, and i had 
conceded the powder after overcoming the shorts. but i can compare 
the effect of it, when on, to nothing but the probable effect of 
rouge upon the dead; so awful was the manner in which everything in 
him that it was most desirable to repress, started through that 
thin layer of pretence, and seemed to come blazing out at the crown 
of his head. it was abandoned as soon as tried, and he wore his 
grizzled hair cut short. 
words cannot tell what a sense i had, at the same time, of the 
dreadful mystery that he was to me. when he fell asleep of an 
evening, with his knotted hands clenching the sides of the 
easy-chair, and his bald head tattooed with deep wrinkles falling 
forward on his breast, i would sit and look at him, wondering what 
he had done, and loading him with all the crimes in the calendar, 
until the impulse was powerful on me to start up and fly from him. 
every hour so increased my abhorrence of him, that i even think i 
might have yielded to this impulse in the first agonies of being so 
haunted, notwithstanding all he had done for me, and the risk he 
ran, but for the knowledge that herbert must soon come back. once, 
i actually did start out of bed in the night, and begin to dress 
myself in my worst clothes, hurriedly intending to leave him there 
with everything else i possessed, and enlist for india as a private 
soldier. 
i doubt if a ghost could have been more terrible to me, up in those 
lonely rooms in the long evenings and long nights, with the wind 
and the rain always rushing by. a ghost could not have been taken 
and hanged on my account, and the consideration that he could be, 
and the dread that he would be, were no small addition to my 
horrors. when he was not asleep, or playing a complicated kind of 
patience with a ragged pack of cards of his own - a game that i 
never saw before or since, and in which he recorded his winnings by 
sticking his jack-knife into the table - when he was not engaged in 
either of these pursuits, he would ask me to read to him - "foreign 
language, dear boy!" while i complied, he, not comprehending a 
single word, would stand before the fire surveying me with the air 
of an exhibitor, and i would see him, between the fingers of the 
hand with which i shaded my face, appealing in dumb show to the 
furniture to take notice of my proficiency. the imaginary student 
pursued by the misshapen creature he had impiously made, was not 
more wretched than i, pursued by the creature who had made me, and 
recoiling from him with a stronger repulsion, the more he admired 
me and the fonder he was of me. 
this is written of, i am sensible, as if it had lasted a year. it 
lasted about five days. expecting herbert all the time, i dared not 
go out, except when i took provis for an airing after dark. at 
length, one evening when dinner was over and i had dropped into a 
slumber quite worn out - for my nights had been agitated and my 
rest broken by fearful dreams - i was roused by the welcome 
footstep on the staircase. provis, who had been asleep too, 
staggered up at the noise i made, and in an instant i saw his 
jack-knife shining in his hand. 
"quiet! it's herbert!" i said; and herbert came bursting in, with 
the airy freshness of six hundred miles of france upon him. 
"handel, my dear fellow, how are you, and again how are you, and 
again how are you? i seem to have been gone a twelvemonth! why, so i 
must have been, for you have grown quite thin and pale! handel, my - 
halloa! i beg your pardon." 
he was stopped in his running on and in his shaking hands with me, 
by seeing provis. provis, regarding him with a fixed attention, was 
slowly putting up his jack-knife, and groping in another pocket for 
something else. 
"herbert, my dear friend," said i, shutting the double doors, while 
herbert stood staring and wondering, "something very strange has 
happened. this is - a visitor of mine." 
"it's all right, dear boy!" said provis coming forward, with his 
little clasped black book, and then addressing himself to herbert. 
"take it in your right hand. lord strike you dead on the spot, if 
ever you split in any way sumever! kiss it!" 
"do so, as he wishes it," i said to herbert. so, herbert, looking 
at me with a friendly uneasiness and amazement, complied, and 
provis immediately shaking hands with him, said, "now you're on 
your oath, you know. and never believe me on mine, if pip shan't 
make a gentleman on you!" 
chapter 41 
in vain should i attempt to describe the astonishment and disquiet 
of herbert, when he and i and provis sat down before the fire, and 
i recounted the whole of the secret. enough, that i saw my own 
feelings reflected in herbert's face, and, not least among them, my 
repugnance towards the man who had done so much for me. 
what would alone have set a division between that man and us, if 
there had been no other dividing circumstance, was his triumph in 
my story. saving his troublesome sense of having been "low' on one 
occasion since his return - on which point he began to hold forth 
to herbert, the moment my revelation was finished - he had no 
perception of the possibility of my finding any fault with my good 
fortune. his boast that he had made me a gentleman, and that he had 
come to see me support the character on his ample resources, was 
made for me quite as much as for himself; and that it was a highly 
agreeable boast to both of us, and that we must both be very proud 
of it, was a conclusion quite established in his own mind. 
"though, look'ee here, pip's comrade," he said to herbert, after 
having discoursed for some time, "i know very well that once since 
i come back - for half a minute - i've been low. i said to pip, i 
knowed as i had been low. but don't you fret yourself on that 
score. i ain't made pip a gentleman, and pip ain't a-going to make 
you a gentleman, not fur me not to know what's due to ye both. dear 
boy, and pip's comrade, you two may count upon me always having a 
gen-teel muzzle on. muzzled i have been since that half a minute 
when i was betrayed into lowness, muzzled i am at the present time, 
muzzled i ever will be." 
herbert said, "certainly," but looked as if there were no specific 
consolation in this, and remained perplexed and dismayed. we were 
anxious for the time when he would go to his lodging, and leave us 
together, but he was evidently jealous of leaving us together, and 
sat late. it was midnight before i took him round to essex-street, 
and saw him safely in at his own dark door. when it closed upon 
him, i experienced the first moment of relief i had known since the 
night of his arrival. 
never quite free from an uneasy remembrance of the man on the 
stairs, i had always looked about me in taking my guest out after 
dark, and in bringing him back; and i looked about me now. 
difficult as it is in a large city to avoid the suspicion of being 
watched, when the mind is conscious of danger in that regard, i 
could not persuade myself that any of the people within sight cared 
about my movements. the few who were passing, passed on their 
several ways, and the street was empty when i turned back into the 
temple. nobody had come out at the gate with us, nobody went in at 
the gate with me. as i crossed by the fountain, i saw his lighted 
back windows looking bright and quiet, and, when i stood for a few 
moments in the doorway of the building where i lived, before going 
up the stairs, garden-court was as still and lifeless as the 
staircase was when i ascended it. 
herbert received me with open arms, and i had never felt before, so 
blessedly, what it is to have a friend. when he had spoken some 
sound words of sympathy and encouragement, we sat down to consider 
the question, what was to be done? 
the chair that provis had occupied still remaining where it had 
stood - for he had a barrack way with him of hanging about one 
spot, in one unsettled manner, and going through one round of 
observances with his pipe and his negro-head and his jack-knife and 
his pack of cards, and what not, as if it were all put down for him 
on a slate - i say, his chair remaining where it had stood, herbert 
unconsciously took it, but next moment started out of it, pushed it 
away, and took another. he had no occasion to say, after that, that 
he had conceived an aversion for my patron, neither had i occasion 
to confess my own. we interchanged that confidence without shaping 
a syllable. 
"what," said i to herbert, when he was safe in another chair, "what 
is to be done?" 
"my poor dear handel," he replied, holding his head, "i am too 
stunned to think." 
"so was i, herbert, when the blow first fell. still, something must 
be done. he is intent upon various new expenses - horses, and 
carriages, and lavish appearances of all kinds. he must be stopped 
somehow." 
"you mean that you can't accept-" 
"how can i?" i interposed, as herbert paused. "think of him! look at 
him!" 
an involuntary shudder passed over both of us. 
"yet i am afraid the dreadful truth is, herbert, that he is 
attached to me, strongly attached to me. was there ever such a 
fate!" 
"my poor dear handel," herbert repeated. 
"then," said i, "after all, stopping short here, never taking 
another penny from him, think what i owe him already! then again: i 
am heavily in debt - very heavily for me, who have now no 
expectations - and i have been bred to no calling, and i am fit for 
nothing." 
"well, well, well!" herbert remonstrated. "don't say fit for 
nothing." 
"what am i fit for? i know only one thing that i am fit for, and 
that is, to go for a soldier. and i might have gone, my dear 
herbert, but for the prospect of taking counsel with your 
friendship and affection." 
of course i broke down there: and of course herbert, beyond seizing 
a warm grip of my hand, pretended not to know it. 
"anyhow, my dear handel," said he presently, "soldiering won't do. 
if you were to renounce this patronage and these favours, i suppose 
you would do so with some faint hope of one day repaying what you 
have already had. not very strong, that hope, if you went 
soldiering! besides, it's absurd. you would be infinitely better in 
clarriker's house, small as it is. i am working up towards a 
partnership, you know." 
poor fellow! he little suspected with whose money. 
"but there is another question," said herbert. "this is an ignorant 
determined man, who has long had one fixed idea. more than that, he 
seems to me (i may misjudge him) to be a man of a desperate and 
fierce character." 
"i know he is," i returned. "let me tell you what evidence i have 
seen of it." and i told him what i had not mentioned in my 
narrative; of that encounter with the other convict. 
"see, then," said herbert; "think of this! he comes here at the 
peril of his life, for the realization of his fixed idea. in the 
moment of realization, after all his toil and waiting, you cut the 
ground from under his feet, destroy his idea, and make his gains 
worthless to him. do you see nothing that he might do, under the 
disappointment?" 
"i have seen it, herbert, and dreamed of it, ever since the fatal 
night of his arrival. nothing has been in my thoughts so 
distinctly, as his putting himself in the way of being taken." 
"then you may rely upon it," said herbert, "that there would be 
great danger of his doing it. that is his power over you as long as 
he remains in england, and that would be his reckless course if you 
forsook him." 
i was so struck by the horror of this idea, which had weighed upon 
me from the first, and the working out of which would make me 
regard myself, in some sort, as his murderer, that i could not rest 
in my chair but began pacing to and fro. i said to herbert, 
meanwhile, that even if provis were recognized and taken, in spite 
of himself, i should be wretched as the cause, however innocently. 
yes; even though i was so wretched in having him at large and near 
me, and even though i would far far rather have worked at the forge 
all the days of my life than i would ever have come to this! 
but there was no staving off the question, what was to be done? 
"the first and the main thing to be done," said herbert, "is to get 
him out of england. you will have to go with him, and then he may 
be induced to go." 
"but get him where i will, could i prevent his coming back?" 
"my good handel, is it not obvious that with newgate in the next 
street, there must be far greater hazard in your breaking your mind 
to him and making him reckless, here, than elsewhere. if a pretext 
to get him away could be made out of that other convict, or out of 
anything else in his life, now." 
"there, again!" said i, stopping before herbert, with my open hands 
held out, as if they contained the desperation of the case. "i know 
nothing of his life. it has almost made me mad to sit here of a 
night and see him before me, so bound up with my fortunes and 
misfortunes, and yet so unknown to me, except as the miserable 
wretch who terrified me two days in my childhood!" 
herbert got up, and linked his arm in mine, and we slowly walked to 
and fro together, studying the carpet. 
"handel," said herbert, stopping, "you feel convinced that you can 
take no further benefits from him; do you?" 
"fully. surely you would, too, if you were in my place?" 
"and you feel convinced that you must break with him?" 
"herbert, can you ask me?" 
"and you have, and are bound to have, that tenderness for the life 
he has risked on your account, that you must save him, if possible, 
from throwing it away. then you must get him out of england before 
you stir a finger to extricate yourself. that done, extricate 
yourself, in heaven's name, and we'll see it out together, dear old 
boy." 
it was a comfort to shake hands upon it, and walk up and down 
again, with only that done. 
"now, herbert," said i, "with reference to gaining some knowledge 
of his history. there is but one way that i know of. i must ask him 
point-blank." 
"yes. ask him," said herbert, "when we sit at breakfast in the 
morning." for, he had said, on taking leave of herbert, that he 
would come to breakfast with us. 
with this project formed, we went to bed. i had the wildest dreams 
concerning him, and woke unrefreshed; i woke, too, to recover the 
fear which i had lost in the night, of his being found out as a 
returned transport. waking, i never lost that fear. 
he came round at the appointed time, took out his jack-knife, and 
sat down to his meal. he was full of plans "for his gentleman's 
coming out strong, and like a gentleman," and urged me to begin 
speedily upon the pocket-book, which he had left in my possession. 
he considered the chambers and his own lodging as temporary 
residences, and advised me to look out at once for a "fashionable 
crib" near hyde park, in which he could have "a shake-down". when 
he had made an end of his breakfast, and was wiping his knife on 
his leg, i said to him, without a word of preface: 
"after you were gone last night, i told my friend of the struggle 
that the soldiers found you engaged in on the marshes, when we came 
up. you remember?" 
"remember!" said he. "i think so!" 
"we want to know something about that man - and about you. it is 
strange to know no more about either, and particularly you, than i 
was able to tell last night. is not this as good a time as another 
for our knowing more?" 
"well!" he said, after consideration. "you're on your oath, you 
know, pip's comrade?" 
"assuredly," replied herbert. 
"as to anything i say, you know," he insisted. "the oath applies to 
all." 
"i understand it to do so." 
"and look'ee here! wotever i done, is worked out and paid for," he 
insisted again. 
"so be it." 
he took out his black pipe and was going to fill it with negrohead, 
when, looking at the tangle of tobacco in his hand, he seemed to 
think it might perplex the thread of his narrative. he put it back 
again, stuck his pipe in a button-hole of his coat, spread a hand 
on each knee, and, after turning an angry eye on the fire for a few 
silent moments, looked round at us and said what follows. 
chapter 42 
"dear boy and pip's comrade. i am not a-going fur to tell you my 
life, like a song or a story-book. but to give it you short and 
handy, i'll put it at once into a mouthful of english. in jail and 
out of jail, in jail and out of jail, in jail and out of jail. 
there, you got it. that's my life pretty much, down to such times 
as i got shipped off, arter pip stood my friend. 
"i've been done everything to, pretty well - except hanged. i've 
been locked up, as much as a silver tea-kettle. i've been carted 
here and carted there, and put out of this town and put out of that 
town, and stuck in the stocks, and whipped and worried and drove. 
i've no more notion where i was born, than you have - if so much. i 
first become aware of myself, down in essex, a thieving turnips for 
my living. summun had run away from me - a man - a tinker - and 
he'd took the fire with him, and left me wery cold. 
"i know'd my name to be magwitch, chrisen'd abel. how did i know 
it? much as i know'd the birds' names in the hedges to be 
chaffinch, sparrer, thrush. i might have thought it was all lies 
together, only as the birds' names come out true, i supposed mine 
did. 
"so fur as i could find, there warn't a soul that see young abel 
magwitch, with us little on him as in him, but wot caught fright at 
him, and either drove him off, or took him up. i was took up, took 
up, took up, to that extent that i reg'larly grow'd up took up. 
"this is the way it was, that when i was a ragged little creetur as 
much to be pitied as ever i see (not that i looked in the glass, 
for there warn't many insides of furnished houses known to me), i 
got the name of being hardened. "this is a terrible hardened one," 
they says to prison wisitors, picking out me. "may be said to live 
in jails, this boy. "then they looked at me, and i looked at them, 
and they measured my head, some on 'em - they had better a-measured 
my stomach - and others on 'em giv me tracts what i couldn't read, 
and made me speeches what i couldn't understand. they always went 
on agen me about the devil. but what the devil was i to do? i must 
put something into my stomach, mustn't i? - howsomever, i'm a 
getting low, and i know what's due. dear boy and pip's comrade, 
don't you be afeerd of me being low. 
"tramping, begging, thieving, working sometimes when i could - 
though that warn't as often as you may think, till you put the 
question whether you would ha' been over-ready to give me work 
yourselves - a bit of a poacher, a bit of a labourer, a bit of a 
waggoner, a bit of a haymaker, a bit of a hawker, a bit of most 
things that don't pay and lead to trouble, i got to be a man. a 
deserting soldier in a traveller's rest, what lay hid up to the 
chin under a lot of taturs, learnt me to read; and a travelling 
giant what signed his name at a penny a time learnt me to write. i 
warn't locked up as often now as formerly, but i wore out my good 
share of keymetal still. 
"at epsom races, a matter of over twenty years ago, i got 
acquainted wi' a man whose skull i'd crack wi' this poker, like the 
claw of a lobster, if i'd got it on this hob. his right name was 
compeyson; and that's the man, dear boy, what you see me a-pounding 
in the ditch, according to what you truly told your comrade arter i 
was gone last night. 
"he set up fur a gentleman, this compeyson, and he'd been to a 
public boarding-school and had learning. he was a smooth one to 
talk, and was a dab at the ways of gentlefolks. he was 
good-looking too. it was the night afore the great race, when i 
found him on the heath, in a booth that i know'd on. him and some 
more was a sitting among the tables when i went in, and the 
landlord (which had a knowledge of me, and was a sporting one) 
called him out, and said, 'i think this is a man that might suit 
you' - meaning i was. 
"compeyson, he looks at me very noticing, and i look at him. he has 
a watch and a chain and a ring and a breast-pin and a handsome suit 
of clothes. 
"'to judge from appearances, you're out of luck,' says compeyson to 
me. 
"'yes, master, and i've never been in it much.' (i had come out of 
kingston jail last on a vagrancy committal. not but what it might 
have been for something else; but it warn't.) 
"'luck changes,' says compeyson; 'perhaps yours is going to change.' 
"i says, 'i hope it may be so. there's room.' 
"'what can you do?' says compeyson. 
"'eat and drink,' i says; 'if you'll find the materials.' 
"compeyson laughed, looked at me again very noticing, giv me five 
shillings, and appointed me for next night. same place. 
"i went to compeyson next night, same place, and compeyson took me 
on to be his man and pardner. and what was compeyson's business in 
which we was to go pardners? compeyson's business was the 
swindling, handwriting forging, stolen bank-note passing, and 
such-like. all sorts of traps as compeyson could set with his head, 
and keep his own legs out of and get the profits from and let 
another man in for, was compeyson's business. he'd no more heart 
than a iron file, he was as cold as death, and he had the head of 
the devil afore mentioned. 
"there was another in with compeyson, as was called arthur - not as 
being so chrisen'd, but as a surname. he was in a decline, and was 
a shadow to look at. him and compeyson had been in a bad thing with 
a rich lady some years afore, and they'd made a pot of money by it; 
but compeyson betted and gamed, and he'd have run through the 
king's taxes. so, arthur was a-dying, and a-dying poor and with the 
horrors on him, and compeyson's wife (which compeyson kicked 
mostly) was a-having pity on him when she could, and compeyson was 
a-having pity on nothing and nobody. 
"i might a-took warning by arthur, but i didn't; and i won't 
pretend i was partick'ler - for where 'ud be the good on it, dear 
boy and comrade? so i begun wi' compeyson, and a poor tool i was in 
his hands. arthur lived at the top of compeyson's house (over nigh 
brentford it was), and compeyson kept a careful account agen him 
for board and lodging, in case he should ever get better to work it 
out. but arthur soon settled the account. the second or third time 
as ever i see him, he come a-tearing down into compeyson's parlour 
late at night, in only a flannel gown, with his hair all in a 
sweat, and he says to compeyson's wife, 'sally, she really is 
upstairs alonger me, now, and i can't get rid of her. she's all in 
white,' he says, 'wi' white flowers in her hair, and she's awful 
mad, and she's got a shroud hanging over her arm, and she says 
she'll put it on me at five in the morning.' 
"says compeyson: 'why, you fool, don't you know she's got a living 
body? and how should she be up there, without coming through the 
door, or in at the window, and up the stairs?' 
"'i don't know how she's there,' says arthur, shivering dreadful 
with the horrors, 'but she's standing in the corner at the foot of 
the bed, awful mad. and over where her heart's brook - you broke 
it! - there's drops of blood.' 
"compeyson spoke hardy, but he was always a coward. 'go up alonger 
this drivelling sick man,' he says to his wife, 'and magwitch, lend 
her a hand, will you?' but he never come nigh himself. 
"compeyson's wife and me took him up to bed agen, and he raved most 
dreadful. 'why look at her!' he cries out. 'she's a-shaking the 
shroud at me! don't you see her? look at her eyes! ain't it awful to 
see her so mad?' next, he cries, 'she'll put it on me, and then i'm 
done for! take it away from her, take it away!' and then he catched 
hold of us, and kep on a-talking to her, and answering of her, till 
i half believed i see her myself. 
"compeyson's wife, being used to him, giv him some liquor to get 
the horrors off, and by-and-by he quieted. 'oh, she's gone! has her 
keeper been for her?' he says. 'yes,' says compeyson's wife. 'did 
you tell him to lock her and bar her in?' 'yes.' 'and to take that 
ugly thing away from her?' 'yes, yes, all right.' 'you're a good 
creetur,' he says, 'don't leave me, whatever you do, and thank 
you!' 
"he rested pretty quiet till it might want a few minutes of five, 
and then he starts up with a scream, and screams out, 'here she 
is! she's got the shroud again. she's unfolding it. she's coming out 
of the corner. she's coming to the bed. hold me, both on you - one 
of each side - don't let her touch me with it. hah! she missed me 
that time. don't let her throw it over my shoulders. don't let her 
lift me up to get it round me. she's lifting me up. keep me down!' 
then he lifted himself up hard, and was dead. 
"compeyson took it easy as a good riddance for both sides. him and 
me was soon busy, and first he swore me (being ever artful) on my 
own book - this here little black book, dear boy, what i swore your 
comrade on. 
"not to go into the things that compeyson planned, and i done - 
which 'ud take a week - i'll simply say to you, dear boy, and pip's 
comrade, that that man got me into such nets as made me his black 
slave. i was always in debt to him, always under his thumb, always 
a-working, always a-getting into danger. he was younger than me, 
but he'd got craft, and he'd got learning, and he overmatched me 
five hundred times told and no mercy. my missis as i had the hard 
time wi' - stop though! i ain't brought her in-" 
he looked about him in a confused way, as if he had lost his place 
in the book of his remembrance; and he turned his face to the fire, 
and spread his hands broader on his knees, and lifted them off and 
put them on again. 
"there ain't no need to go into it," he said, looking round once 
more. "the time wi' compeyson was a'most as hard a time as ever i 
had; that said, all's said. did i tell you as i was tried, alone, 
for misdemeanour, while with compeyson?" 
i answered, no. 
"well!" he said, "i was, and got convicted. as to took up on 
suspicion, that was twice or three times in the four or five year 
that it lasted; but evidence was wanting. at last, me and compeyson 
was both committed for felony - on a charge of putting stolen notes 
in circulation - and there was other charges behind. compeyson says 
to me, 'separate defences, no communication,' and that was all. and 
i was so miserable poor, that i sold all the clothes i had, except 
what hung on my back, afore i could get jaggers. 
"when we was put in the dock, i noticed first of all what a 
gentleman compeyson looked, wi' his curly hair and his black 
clothes and his white pocket-handkercher, and what a common sort of 
a wretch i looked. when the prosecution opened and the evidence was 
put short, aforehand, i noticed how heavy it all bore on me, and 
how light on him. when the evidence was giv in the box, i noticed 
how it was always me that had come for'ard, and could be swore to, 
how it was always me that the money had been paid to, how it was 
always me that had seemed to work the thing and get the profit. 
but, when the defence come on, then i see the plan plainer; for, 
says the counsellor for compeyson, 'my lord and gentlemen, here you 
has afore you, side by side, two persons as your eyes can separate 
wide; one, the younger, well brought up, who will be spoke to as 
such; one, the elder, ill brought up, who will be spoke to as such; 
one, the younger, seldom if ever seen in these here transactions, 
and only suspected; t'other, the elder, always seen in 'em and 
always wi'his guilt brought home. can you doubt, if there is but 
one in it, which is the one, and, if there is two in it, which is 
much the worst one?' and such-like. and when it come to character, 
warn't it compeyson as had been to the school, and warn't it his 
schoolfellows as was in this position and in that, and warn't it 
him as had been know'd by witnesses in such clubs and societies, 
and nowt to his disadvantage? and warn't it me as had been tried 
afore, and as had been know'd up hill and down dale in bridewells 
and lock-ups? and when it come to speech-making, warn't it 
compeyson as could speak to 'em wi' his face dropping every now and 
then into his white pocket-handkercher - ah! and wi' verses in his 
speech, too - and warn't it me as could only say, 'gentlemen, this 
man at my side is a most precious rascal'? and when the verdict 
come, warn't it compeyson as was recommended to mercy on account of 
good character and bad company, and giving up all the information 
he could agen me, and warn't it me as got never a word but guilty? 
and when i says to compeyson, 'once out of this court, i'll smash 
that face of yourn!' ain't it compeyson as prays the judge to be 
protected, and gets two turnkeys stood betwixt us? and when we're 
sentenced, ain't it him as gets seven year, and me fourteen, and 
ain't it him as the judge is sorry for, because he might a done so 
well, and ain't it me as the judge perceives to be a old offender 
of wiolent passion, likely to come to worse?" 
he had worked himself into a state of great excitement, but he 
checked it, took two or three short breaths, swallowed as often, 
and stretching out his hand towards me said, in a reassuring 
manner, "i ain't a-going to be low, dear boy!" 
he had so heated himself that he took out his handkerchief and 
wiped his face and head and neck and hands, before he could go on. 
"i had said to compeyson that i'd smash that face of his, and i 
swore lord smash mine! to do it. we was in the same prison-ship, 
but i couldn't get at him for long, though i tried. at last i come 
behind him and hit him on the cheek to turn him round and get a 
smashing one at him, when i was seen and seized. the black-hole of 
that ship warn't a strong one, to a judge of black-holes that could 
swim and dive. i escaped to the shore, and i was a hiding among the 
graves there, envying them as was in 'em and all over, when i first 
see my boy!" 
he regarded me with a look of affection that made him almost 
abhorrent to me again, though i had felt great pity for him. 
"by my boy, i was giv to understand as compeyson was out on them 
marshes too. upon my soul, i half believe he escaped in his terror, 
to get quit of me, not knowing it was me as had got ashore. i 
hunted him down. i smashed his face. 'and now,' says i 'as the 
worst thing i can do, caring nothing for myself, i'll drag you 
back.' and i'd have swum off, towing him by the hair, if it had 
come to that, and i'd a got him aboard without the soldiers. 
"of course he'd much the best of it to the last - his character was 
so good. he had escaped when he was made half-wild by me and my 
murderous intentions; and his punishment was light. i was put in 
irons, brought to trial again, and sent for life. i didn't stop for 
life, dear boy and pip's comrade, being here." 
"he wiped himself again, as he had done before, and then slowly 
took his tangle of tobacco from his pocket, and plucked his pipe 
from his button-hole, and slowly filled it, and began to smoke. 
"is he dead?" i asked, after a silence. 
"is who dead, dear boy?" 
"compeyson." 
"he hopes i am, if he's alive, you may be sure," with a fierce 
look. "i never heerd no more of him." 
herbert had been writing with his pencil in the cover of a book. he 
softly pushed the book over to me, as provis stood smoking with his 
eyes on the fire, and i read in it: 
"young havisham's name was arthur. compeyson is the man who 
professed to be miss havisham's lover." 
i shut the book and nodded slightly to herbert, and put the book 
by; but we neither of us said anything, and both looked at provis 
as he stood smoking by the fire. 
chapter 43 
why should i pause to ask how much of my shrinking from provis 
might be traced to estella? why should i loiter on my road, to 
compare the state of mind in which i had tried to rid myself of the 
stain of the prison before meeting her at the coach-office, with 
the state of mind in which i now reflected on the abyss between 
estella in her pride and beauty, and the returned transport whom i 
harboured? the road would be none the smoother for it, the end 
would be none the better for it, he would not be helped, nor i 
extenuated. 
a new fear had been engendered in my mind by his narrative; or 
rather, his narrative had given form and purpose to the fear that 
was already there. if compeyson were alive and should discover his 
return, i could hardly doubt the consequence. that, compeyson stood 
in mortal fear of him, neither of the two could know much better 
than i; and that, any such man as that man had been described to 
be, would hesitate to release himself for good from a dreaded enemy 
by the safe means of becoming an informer, was scarcely to be 
imagined. 
never had i breathed, and never would i breathe - or so i resolved 
a word of estella to provis. but, i said to herbert that before i 
could go abroad, i must see both estella and miss havisham. this 
was when we were left alone on the night of the day when provis 
told us his story. i resolved to go out to richmond next day, and i 
went. 
on my presenting myself at mrs. brandley's, estella's maid was 
called to tell that estella had gone into the country. where? to 
satis house, as usual. not as usual, i said, for she had never yet 
gone there without me; when was she coming back? there was an air 
of reservation in the answer which increased my perplexity, and the 
answer was, that her maid believed she was only coming back at all 
for a little while. i could make nothing of this, except that it 
was meant that i should make nothing of it, and i went home again 
in complete discomfiture. 
another night-consultation with herbert after provis was gone home 
(i always took him home, and always looked well about me), led us 
to the conclusion that nothing should be said about going abroad 
until i came back from miss havisham's. in the meantime, herbert 
and i were to consider separately what it would be best to say; 
whether we should devise any pretence of being afraid that he was 
under suspicious observation; or whether i, who had never yet been 
abroad, should propose an expedition. we both knew that i had but 
to propose anything, and he would consent. we agreed that his 
remaining many days in his present hazard was not to be thought of. 
next day, i had the meanness to feign that i was under a binding 
promise to go down to joe; but i was capable of almost any meanness 
towards joe or his name. provis was to be strictly careful while i 
was gone, and herbert was to take the charge of him that i had 
taken. i was to be absent only one night, and, on my return, the 
gratification of his impatience for my starting as a gentleman on a 
greater scale, was to be begun. it occurred to me then, and as i 
afterwards found to herbert also, that he might be best got away 
across the water, on that pretence - as, to make purchases, or the 
like. 
having thus cleared the way for my expedition to miss havisham's, i 
set off by the early morning coach before it was yet light, and was 
out on the open country-road when the day came creeping on, halting 
and whimpering and shivering, and wrapped in patches of cloud and 
rags of mist, like a beggar. when we drove up to the blue boar 
after a drizzly ride, whom should i see come out under the gateway, 
toothpick in hand, to look at the coach, but bentley drummle! 
as he pretended not to see me, i pretended not to see him. it was a 
very lame pretence on both sides; the lamer, because we both went 
into the coffee-room, where he had just finished his breakfast, and 
where i ordered mine. it was poisonous to me to see him in the 
town, for i very well knew why he had come there. 
pretending to read a smeary newspaper long out of date, which had 
nothing half so legible in its local news, as the foreign matter of 
coffee, pickles, fish-sauces, gravy, melted butter, and wine, with 
which it was sprinkled all over, as if it had taken the measles in 
a highly irregular form, i sat at my table while he stood before 
the fire. by degrees it became an enormous injury to me that he 
stood before the fire, and i got up, determined to have my share of 
it. i had to put my hand behind his legs for the poker when i went 
up to the fire-place to stir the fire, but still pretended not to 
know him. 
"is this a cut?" said mr. drummle. 
"oh!" said i, poker in hand; "it's you, is it? how do you do? i was 
wondering who it was, who kept the fire off." 
with that, i poked tremendously, and having done so, planted myself 
side by side with mr. drummle, my shoulders squared and my back to 
the fire. 
"you have just come down?" said mr. drummle, edging me a little away 
with his shoulder. 
"yes," said i, edging him a little away with my shoulder. 
"beastly place," said drummle. - "your part of the country, i 
think?" 
"yes," i assented. "i am told it's very like your shropshire." 
"not in the least like it," said drummle. 
here mr. drummle looked at his boots, and i looked at mine, and then 
mr. drummle looked at my boots, and i looked at his. 
"have you been here long?" i asked, determined not to yield an inch 
of the fire. 
"long enough to be tired of it," returned drummle, pretending to 
yawn, but equally determined. 
"do you stay here long?" 
"can't say," answered mr. drummle. "do you?" 
"can't say," said i. 
i felt here, through a tingling in my blood, that if mr. drummle's 
shoulder had claimed another hair's breadth of room, i should have 
jerked him into the window; equally, that if my own shoulder had 
urged a similar claim, mr. drummle would have jerked me into the 
nearest box. he whistled a little. so did i. 
"large tract of marshes about here, i believe?" said drummle. 
"yes. what of that?" said i. 
mr. drummle looked at me, and then at my boots, and then said, "oh!" 
and laughed. 
"are you amused, mr. drummle?" 
"no," said he, "not particularly. i am going out for a ride in the 
saddle. i mean to explore those marshes for amusement. 
out-of-the-way villages there, they tell me. curious little 
public-houses - and smithies - and that. waiter!" 
"yes, sir." 
"is that horse of mine ready?" 
"brought round to the door, sir." 
"i say. look here, you sir. the lady won't ride to-day; the weather 
won't do." 
"very good, sir." 
"and i don't dine, because i'm going to dine at the lady's." 
"very good, sir." 
then, drummle glanced at me, with an insolent triumph on his 
great-jowled face that cut me to the heart, dull as he was, and so 
exasperated me, that i felt inclined to take him in my arms (as the 
robber in the story-book is said to have taken the old lady), and 
seat him on the fire. 
one thing was manifest to both of us, and that was, that until 
relief came, neither of us could relinquish the fire. there we 
stood, well squared up before it, shoulder to shoulder and foot to 
foot, with our hands behind us, not budging an inch. the horse was 
visible outside in the drizzle at the door, my breakfast was put on 
the table, drummle's was cleared away, the waiter invited me to 
begin, i nodded, we both stood our ground. 
"have you been to the grove since?" said drummle. 
"no," said i, "i had quite enough of the finches the last time i 
was there." 
"was that when we had a difference of opinion?" 
"yes," i replied, very shortly. 
"come, come! they let you off easily enough," sneered drummle. "you 
shouldn't have lost your temper." 
"mr. drummle," said i, "you are not competent to give advice on that 
subject. when i lose my temper (not that i admit having done so on 
that occasion), i don't throw glasses." 
"i do," said drummle. 
after glancing at him once or twice, in an increased state of 
smouldering ferocity, i said: 
"mr. drummle, i did not seek this conversation, and i don't think it 
an agreeable one." 
"i am sure it's not," said he, superciliously over his shoulder; "i 
don't think anything about it." 
"and therefore," i went on, "with your leave, i will suggest that 
we hold no kind of communication in future." 
"quite my opinion," said drummle, "and what i should have suggested 
myself, or done - more likely - without suggesting. but don't lose 
your temper. haven't you lost enough without that?" 
"what do you mean, sir?" 
"wai-ter!" said drummle, by way of answering me. 
the waiter reappeared. 
"look here, you sir. you quite understand that the young lady don't 
ride to-day, and that i dine at the young lady's?" 
"quite so, sir!" 
when the waiter had felt my fast cooling tea-pot with the palm of 
his hand, and had looked imploringly at me, and had gone out, 
drummle, careful not to move the shoulder next me, took a cigar 
from his pocket and bit the end off, but showed no sign of 
stirring. choking and boiling as i was, i felt that we could not go 
a word further, without introducing estella's name, which i could 
not endure to hear him utter; and therefore i looked stonily at the 
opposite wall, as if there were no one present, and forced myself 
to silence. how long we might have remained in this ridiculous 
position it is impossible to say, but for the incursion of three 
thriving farmers - led on by the waiter, i think - who came into 
the coffee-room unbuttoning their great-coats and rubbing their 
hands, and before whom, as they charged at the fire, we were 
obliged to give way. 
i saw him through the window, seizing his horse's mane, and 
mounting in his blundering brutal manner, and sidling and backing 
away. i thought he was gone, when he came back, calling for a light 
for the cigar in his mouth, which he had forgotten. a man in a 
dustcoloured dress appeared with what was wanted - i could not have 
said from where: whether from the inn yard, or the street, or where 
not - and as drummle leaned down from the saddle and lighted his 
cigar and laughed, with a jerk of his head towards the coffee-room 
windows, the slouching shoulders and ragged hair of this man, whose 
back was towards me, reminded me of orlick. 
too heavily out of sorts to care much at the time whether it were 
he or no, or after all to touch the breakfast, i washed the weather 
and the journey from my face and hands, and went out to the 
memorable old house that it would have been so much the better for 
me never to have entered, never to have seen. 
chapter 44 
in the room where the dressing-table stood, and where the wax 
candles burnt on the wall, i found miss havisham and estella; miss 
havisham seated on a settee near the fire, and estella on a cushion 
at her feet. estella was knitting, and miss havisham was looking 
on. they both raised their eyes as i went in, and both saw an 
alteration in me. i derived that, from the look they interchanged. 
"and what wind," said miss havisham, "blows you here, pip?" 
though she looked steadily at me, i saw that she was rather 
confused. estella, pausing a moment in her knitting with her eyes 
upon me, and then going on, i fancied that i read in the action of 
her fingers, as plainly as if she had told me in the dumb alphabet, 
that she perceived i had discovered my real benefactor. 
"miss havisham," said i, "i went to richmond yesterday, to speak to 
estella; and finding that some wind had blown her here, i 
followed." 
miss havisham motioning to me for the third or fourth time to sit 
down, i took the chair by the dressing-table, which i had often 
seen her occupy. with all that ruin at my feet and about me, it 
seemed a natural place for me, that day. 
"what i had to say to estella, miss havisham, i will say before 
you, presently - in a few moments. it will not surprise you, it 
will not displease you. i am as unhappy as you can ever have meant 
me to be." 
miss havisham continued to look steadily at me. i could see in the 
action of estella's fingers as they worked, that she attended to 
what i said: but she did not look up. 
"i have found out who my patron is. it is not a fortunate 
discovery, and is not likely ever to enrich me in reputation, 
station, fortune, anything. there are reasons why i must say no 
more of that. it is not my secret, but another's." 
as i was silent for a while, looking at estella and considering how 
to go on, miss havisham repeated, "it is not your secret, but 
another's. well?" 
"when you first caused me to be brought here, miss havisham; when i 
belonged to the village over yonder, that i wish i had never left; 
i suppose i did really come here, as any other chance boy might 
have come - as a kind of servant, to gratify a want or a whim, and 
to be paid for it?" 
"ay, pip," replied miss havisham, steadily nodding her head; "you 
did." 
"and that mr. jaggers-" 
"mr. jaggers," said miss havisham, taking me up in a firm tone, "had 
nothing to do with it, and knew nothing of it. his being my lawyer, 
and his being the lawyer of your patron, is a coincidence. he holds 
the same relation towards numbers of people, and it might easily 
arise. be that as it may, it did arise, and was not brought about 
by any one." 
any one might have seen in her haggard face that there was no 
suppression or evasion so far. 
"but when i fell into the mistake i have so long remained in, at 
least you led me on?" said i. 
"yes," she returned, again nodding, steadily, "i let you go on." 
"was that kind?" 
"who am i," cried miss havisham, striking her stick upon the floor 
and flashing into wrath so suddenly that estella glanced up at her 
in surprise, "who am i, for god's sake, that i should be kind?" 
it was a weak complaint to have made, and i had not meant to make 
it. i told her so, as she sat brooding after this outburst. 
"well, well, well!" she said. "what else?" 
"i was liberally paid for my old attendance here," i said, to 
soothe her, "in being apprenticed, and i have asked these questions 
only for my own information. what follows has another (and i hope 
more disinterested) purpose. in humouring my mistake, miss 
havisham, you punished - practised on - perhaps you will supply 
whatever term expresses your intention, without offence - your 
self-seeking relations?" 
"i did. why, they would have it so! so would you. what has been my 
history, that i should be at the pains of entreating either them, 
or you, not to have it so! you made your own snares. i never made 
them." 
waiting until she was quiet again - for this, too, flashed out of 
her in a wild and sudden way - i went on. 
"i have been thrown among one family of your relations, miss 
havisham, and have been constantly among them since i went to 
london. i know them to have been as honestly under my delusion as i 
myself. and i should be false and base if i did not tell you, 
whether it is acceptable to you or no, and whether you are inclined 
to give credence to it or no, that you deeply wrong both mr. matthew 
pocket and his son herbert, if you suppose them to be otherwise 
than generous, upright, open, and incapable of anything designing 
or mean." 
"they are your friends," said miss havisham. 
"they made themselves my friends," said i, "when they supposed me 
to have superseded them; and when sarah pocket, miss georgiana, and 
mistress camilla, were not my friends, i think." 
this contrasting of them with the rest seemed, i was glad to see, 
to do them good with her. she looked at me keenly for a little 
while, and then said quietly: 
"what do you want for them?" 
"only," said i, "that you would not confound them with the others. 
they may be of the same blood, but, believe me, they are not of the 
same nature." 
still looking at me keenly, miss havisham repeated: 
"what do you want for them?" 
"i am not so cunning, you see," i said, in answer, conscious that i 
reddened a little, "as that i could hide from you, even if i 
desired, that i do want something. miss havisham, if you would 
spare the money to do my friend herbert a lasting service in life, 
but which from the nature of the case must be done without his 
knowledge, i could show you how." 
"why must it be done without his knowledge?" she asked, settling 
her hands upon her stick, that she might regard me the more 
attentively. 
"because," said i, "i began the service myself, more than two years 
ago, without his knowledge, and i don't want to be betrayed. why i 
fail in my ability to finish it, i cannot explain. it is a part of 
the secret which is another person's and not mine." 
she gradually withdrew her eyes from me, and turned them on the 
fire. after watching it for what appeared in the silence and by the 
light of the slowly wasting candles to be a long time, she was 
roused by the collapse of some of the red coals, and looked towards 
me again - at first, vacantly - then, with a gradually 
concentrating attention. all this time, estella knitted on. when 
miss havisham had fixed her attention on me, she said, speaking as 
if there had been no lapse in our dialogue: 
"what else?" 
"estella," said i, turning to her now, and trying to command my 
trembling voice, "you know i love you. you know that i have loved 
you long and dearly." 
she raised her eyes to my face, on being thus addressed, and her 
fingers plied their work, and she looked at me with an unmoved 
countenance. i saw that miss havisham glanced from me to her, and 
from her to me. 
"i should have said this sooner, but for my long mistake. it 
induced me to hope that miss havisham meant us for one another. 
while i thought you could not help yourself, as it were, i 
refrained from saying it. but i must say it now." 
preserving her unmoved countenance, and with her fingers still 
going, estella shook her head. 
"i know," said i, in answer to that action; "i know. i have no hope 
that i shall ever call you mine, estella. i am ignorant what may 
become of me very soon, how poor i may be, or where i may go. 
still, i love you. i have loved you ever since i first saw you in 
this house." 
looking at me perfectly unmoved and with her fingers busy, she 
shook her head again. 
"it would have been cruel in miss havisham, horribly cruel, to 
practise on the susceptibility of a poor boy, and to torture me 
through all these years with a vain hope and an idle pursuit, if 
she had reflected on the gravity of what she did. but i think she 
did not. i think that in the endurance of her own trial, she forgot 
mine, estella." 
i saw miss havisham put her hand to her heart and hold it there, as 
she sat looking by turns at estella and at me. 
"it seems," said estella, very calmly, "that there are sentiments, 
fancies - i don't know how to call them - which i am not able to 
comprehend. when you say you love me, i know what you mean, as a 
form of words; but nothing more. you address nothing in my breast, 
you touch nothing there. i don't care for what you say at all. i 
have tried to warn you of this; now, have i not?" 
i said in a miserable manner, "yes." 
"yes. but you would not be warned, for you thought i did not mean 
it. now, did you not think so?" 
"i thought and hoped you could not mean it. you, so young, untried, 
and beautiful, estella! surely it is not in nature." 
"it is in my nature," she returned. and then she added, with a 
stress upon the words, "it is in the nature formed within me. i 
make a great difference between you and all other people when i say 
so much. i can do no more." 
"is it not true," said i, "that bentley drummle is in town here, 
and pursuing you?" 
"it is quite true," she replied, referring to him with the 
indifference of utter contempt. 
"that you encourage him, and ride out with him, and that he dines 
with you this very day?" 
she seemed a little surprised that i should know it, but again 
replied, "quite true." 
"you cannot love him, estella!" 
her fingers stopped for the first time, as she retorted rather 
angrily, "what have i told you? do you still think, in spite of it, 
that i do not mean what i say?" 
"you would never marry him, estella?" 
she looked towards miss havisham, and considered for a moment with 
her work in her hands. then she said, "why not tell you the truth? 
i am going to be married to him." 
i dropped my face into my hands, but was able to control myself 
better than i could have expected, considering what agony it gave 
me to hear her say those words. when i raised my face again, there 
was such a ghastly look upon miss havisham's, that it impressed me, 
even in my passionate hurry and grief. 
"estella, dearest dearest estella, do not let miss havisham lead 
you into this fatal step. put me aside for ever - you have done so, 
i well know - but bestow yourself on some worthier person than 
drummle. miss havisham gives you to him, as the greatest slight and 
injury that could be done to the many far better men who admire 
you, and to the few who truly love you. among those few, there may 
be one who loves you even as dearly, though he has not loved you as 
long, as i. take him, and i can bear it better, for your sake!" 
my earnestness awoke a wonder in her that seemed as if it would 
have been touched with compassion, if she could have rendered me at 
all intelligible to her own mind. 
"i am going," she said again, in a gentler voice, "to be married to 
him. the preparations for my marriage are making, and i shall be 
married soon. why do you injuriously introduce the name of my 
mother by adoption? it is my own act." 
"your own act, estella, to fling yourself away upon a brute?" 
"on whom should i fling myself away?" she retorted, with a smile. 
"should i fling myself away upon the man who would the soonest feel 
(if people do feel such things) that i took nothing to him? there! 
it is done. i shall do well enough, and so will my husband. as to 
leading me into what you call this fatal step, miss havisham would 
have had me wait, and not marry yet; but i am tired of the life i 
have led, which has very few charms for me, and i am willing enough 
to change it. say no more. we shall never understand each other." 
"such a mean brute, such a stupid brute!" i urged in despair. 
"don't be afraid of my being a blessing to him," said estella; "i 
shall not be that. come! here is my hand. do we part on this, you 
visionary boy - or man?" 
"o estella!" i answered, as my bitter tears fell fast on her hand, 
do what i would to restrain them; "even if i remained in england 
and could hold my head up with the rest, how could i see you 
drummle's wife?" 
"nonsense," she returned, "nonsense. this will pass in no time." 
"never, estella!" 
"you will get me out of your thoughts in a week." 
"out of my thoughts! you are part of my existence, part of myself. 
you have been in every line i have ever read, since i first came 
here, the rough common boy whose poor heart you wounded even then. 
you have been in every prospect i have ever seen since - on the 
river, on the sails of the ships, on the marshes, in the clouds, in 
the light, in the darkness, in the wind, in the woods, in the sea, 
in the streets. you have been the embodiment of every graceful 
fancy that my mind has ever become acquainted with. the stones of 
which the strongest london buildings are made, are not more real, 
or more impossible to be displaced by your hands, than your 
presence and influence have been to me, there and everywhere, and 
will be. estella, to the last hour of my life, you cannot choose 
but remain part of my character, part of the little good in me, 
part of the evil. but, in this separation i associate you only with 
the good, and i will faithfully hold you to that always, for you 
must have done me far more good than harm, let me feel now what 
sharp distress i may. o god bless you, god forgive you!" 
in what ecstasy of unhappiness i got these broken words out of 
myself, i don't know. the rhapsody welled up within me, like blood 
from an inward wound, and gushed out. i held her hand to my lips 
some lingering moments, and so i left her. but ever afterwards, i 
remembered - and soon afterwards with stronger reason - that while 
estella looked at me merely with incredulous wonder, the spectral 
figure of miss havisham, her hand still covering her heart, seemed 
all resolved into a ghastly stare of pity and remorse. 
all done, all gone! so much was done and gone, that when i went out 
at the gate, the light of the day seemed of a darker colour than 
when i went in. for a while, i hid myself among some lanes and 
by-paths, and then struck off to walk all the way to london. for, i 
had by that time come to myself so far, as to consider that i could 
not go back to the inn and see drummle there; that i could not bear 
to sit upon the coach and be spoken to; that i could do nothing 
half so good for myself as tire myself out. 
it was past midnight when i crossed london bridge. pursuing the 
narrow intricacies of the streets which at that time tended 
westward near the middlesex shore of the river, my readiest access 
to the temple was close by the river-side, through whitefriars. i 
was not expected till to-morrow, but i had my keys, and, if herbert 
were gone to bed, could get to bed myself without disturbing him. 
as it seldom happened that i came in at that whitefriars gate after 
the temple was closed, and as i was very muddy and weary, i did not 
take it ill that the night-porter examined me with much attention 
as he held the gate a little way open for me to pass in. to help 
his memory i mentioned my name. 
"i was not quite sure, sir, but i thought so. here's a note, sir. 
the messenger that brought it, said would you be so good as read it 
by my lantern?" 
much surprised by the request, i took the note. it was directed to 
philip pip, esquire, and on the top of the superscription were the 
words, "please read this, here." i opened it, the watchman holding 
up his light, and read inside, in wemmick's writing: 
"don't go home." 
chapter 45 
turning from the temple gate as soon as i had read the warning, i 
made the best of my way to fleet-street, and there got a late 
hackney chariot and drove to the hummums in covent garden. in those 
times a bed was always to be got there at any hour of the night, 
and the chamberlain, letting me in at his ready wicket, lighted the 
candle next in order on his shelf, and showed me straight into the 
bedroom next in order on his list. it was a sort of vault on the 
ground floor at the back, with a despotic monster of a four-post 
bedstead in it, straddling over the whole place, putting one of his 
arbitrary legs into the fire-place and another into the doorway, 
and squeezing the wretched little washing-stand in quite a divinely 
righteous manner. 
as i had asked for a night-light, the chamberlain had brought me 
in, before he left me, the good old constitutional rush-light of 
those virtuous days - an object like the ghost of a walking-cane, 
which instantly broke its back if it were touched, which nothing 
could ever be lighted at, and which was placed in solitary 
confinement at the bottom of a high tin tower, perforated with 
round holes that made a staringly wide-awake pattern on the walls. 
when i had got into bed, and lay there footsore, weary, and 
wretched, i found that i could no more close my own eyes than i 
could close the eyes of this foolish argus. and thus, in the gloom 
and death of the night, we stared at one another. 
what a doleful night! how anxious, how dismal, how long! there was 
an inhospitable smell in the room, of cold soot and hot dust; and, 
as i looked up into the corners of the tester over my head, i 
thought what a number of blue-bottle flies from the butchers', and 
earwigs from the market, and grubs from the country, must be 
holding on up there, lying by for next summer. this led me to 
speculate whether any of them ever tumbled down, and then i fancied 
that i felt light falls on my face - a disagreeable turn of thought, 
suggesting other and more objectionable approaches up my back. when 
i had lain awake a little while, those extraordinary voices with 
which silence teems, began to make themselves audible. the closet 
whispered, the fireplace sighed, the little washing-stand ticked, 
and one guitar-string played occasionally in the chest of drawers. 
at about the same time, the eyes on the wall acquired a new 
expression, and in every one of those staring rounds i saw 
written, don't go home. 
whatever night-fancies and night-noises crowded on me, they never 
warded off this don't go home. it plaited itself into whatever i 
thought of, as a bodily pain would have done. not long before, i 
had read in the newspapers, how a gentleman unknown had come to the 
hummums in the night, and had gone to bed, and had destroyed 
himself, and had been found in the morning weltering in blood. it 
came into my head that he must have occupied this very vault of 
mine, and i got out of bed to assure myself that there were no red 
marks about; then opened the door to look out into the passages, 
and cheer myself with the companionship of a distant light, near 
which i knew the chamberlain to be dozing. but all this time, why i 
was not to go home, and what had happened at home, and when i 
should go home, and whether provis was safe at home, were questions 
occupying my mind so busily, that one might have supposed there 
could be no more room in it for any other theme. even when i 
thought of estella, and how we had parted that day for ever, and 
when i recalled all the circumstances of our parting, and all her 
looks and tones, and the action of her fingers while she knitted - 
even then i was pursuing, here and there and everywhere, the 
caution don't go home. when at last i dozed, in sheer exhaustion of 
mind and body, it became a vast shadowy verb which i had to 
conjugate. imperative mood, present tense: do not thou go home, let 
him not go home, let us not go home, do not ye or you go home, let 
not them go home. then, potentially: i may not and i cannot go 
home; and i might not, could not, would not, and should not go 
home; until i felt that i was going distracted, and rolled over on 
the pillow, and looked at the staring rounds upon the wall again. 
i had left directions that i was to be called at seven; for it was 
plain that i must see wemmick before seeing any one else, and 
equally plain that this was a case in which his walworth 
sentiments, only, could be taken. it was a relief to get out of the 
room where the night had been so miserable, and i needed no second 
knocking at the door to startle me from my uneasy bed. 
the castle battlements arose upon my view at eight o'clock. the 
little servant happening to be entering the fortress with two hot 
rolls, i passed through the postern and crossed the drawbridge, in 
her company, and so came without announcement into the presence of 
wemmick as he was making tea for himself and the aged. an open door 
afforded a perspective view of the aged in bed. 
"halloa, mr. pip!" said wemmick. "you did come home, then?" 
"yes," i returned; "but i didn't go home." 
"that's all right," said he, rubbing his hands. "i left a note for 
you at each of the temple gates, on the chance. which gate did you 
come to?" 
i told him. 
"i'll go round to the others in the course of the day and destroy 
the notes," said wemmick; "it's a good rule never to leave 
documentary evidence if you can help it, because you don't know 
when it may be put in. i'm going to take a liberty with you. - 
would you mind toasting this sausage for the aged p.?" 
i said i should be delighted to do it. 
"then you can go about your work, mary anne," said wemmick to the 
little servant; "which leaves us to ourselves, don't you see, mr. 
pip?" he added, winking, as she disappeared. 
i thanked him for his friendship and caution, and our discourse 
proceeded in a low tone, while i toasted the aged's sausage and he 
buttered the crumb of the aged's roll. 
"now, mr. pip, you know," said wemmick, "you and i understand one 
another. we are in our private and personal capacities, and we have 
been engaged in a confidential transaction before today. official 
sentiments are one thing. we are extra official." 
i cordially assented. i was so very nervous, that i had already 
lighted the aged's sausage like a torch, and been obliged to blow 
it out. 
"i accidentally heard, yesterday morning," said wemmick, "being in 
a certain place where i once took you - even between you and me, 
it's as well not to mention names when avoidable-" 
"much better not," said i. "i understand you." 
"i heard there by chance, yesterday morning," said wemmick, "that a 
certain person not altogether of uncolonial pursuits, and not 
unpossessed of portable property - i don't know who it may really 
be - we won't name this person-" 
"not necessary," said i. 
" - had made some little stir in a certain part of the world where 
a good many people go, not always in gratification of their own 
inclinations, and not quite irrespective of the government 
expense-" 
in watching his face, i made quite a firework of the aged's 
sausage, and greatly discomposed both my own attention and 
wemmick's; for which i apologized. 
" - by disappearing from such place, and being no more heard of 
thereabouts. from which," said wemmick, "conjectures had been 
raised and theories formed. i also heard that you at your chambers 
in garden court, temple, had been watched, and might be watched 
again." 
"by whom?" said i. 
"i wouldn't go into that," said wemmick, evasively, "it might clash 
with official responsibilities. i heard it, as i have in my time 
heard other curious things in the same place. i don't tell it you 
on information received. i heard it." 
he took the toasting-fork and sausage from me as he spoke, and set 
forth the aged's breakfast neatly on a little tray. previous to 
placing it before him, he went into the aged's room with a clean 
white cloth, and tied the same under the old gentleman's chin, and 
propped him up, and put his nightcap on one side, and gave him 
quite a rakish air. then, he placed his breakfast before him with 
great care, and said, "all right, ain't you, aged p.?" to which the 
cheerful aged replied, "all right, john, my boy, all right!" as 
there seemed to be a tacit understanding that the aged was not in a 
presentable state, and was therefore to be considered invisible, i 
made a pretence of being in complete ignorance of these 
proceedings. 
"this watching of me at my chambers (which i have once had reason 
to suspect)," i said to wemmick when he came back, "is inseparable 
from the person to whom you have adverted; is it?" 
wemmick looked very serious. "i couldn't undertake to say that, of 
my own knowledge. i mean, i couldn't undertake to say it was at 
first. but it either is, or it will be, or it's in great danger of 
being." 
as i saw that he was restrained by fealty to little britain from 
saying as much as he could, and as i knew with thankfulness to him 
how far out of his way he went to say what he did, i could not 
press him. but i told him, after a little meditation over the fire, 
that i would like to ask him a question, subject to his answering 
or not answering, as he deemed right, and sure that his course 
would be right. he paused in his breakfast, and crossing his arms, 
and pinching his shirt-sleeves (his notion of indoor comfort was to 
sit without any coat), he nodded to me once, to put my question. 
"you have heard of a man of bad character, whose true name is 
compeyson?" 
he answered with one other nod. 
"is he living?" 
one other nod. 
"is he in london?" 
he gave me one other nod, compressed the post-office exceedingly, 
gave me one last nod, and went on with his breakfast. 
"now," said wemmick, "questioning being over;" which he emphasized 
and repeated for my guidance; "i come to what i did, after hearing 
what i heard. i went to garden court to find you; not finding you, 
i went to clarriker's to find mr. herbert." 
"and him you found?" said i, with great anxiety. 
"and him i found. without mentioning any names or going into any 
details, i gave him to understand that if he was aware of anybody - 
tom, jack, or richard - being about the chambers, or about the 
immediate neighbourhood, he had better get tom, jack, or richard, 
out of the way while you were out of the way." 
"he would be greatly puzzled what to do?" 
"he was puzzled what to do; not the less, because i gave him my 
opinion that it was not safe to try to get tom, jack, or richard, 
too far out of the way at present. mr. pip, i'll tell you something. 
under existing circumstances there is no place like a great city 
when you are once in it. don't break cover too soon. lie close. 
wait till things slacken, before you try the open, even for foreign 
air." 
i thanked him for his valuable advice, and asked him what herbert 
had done? 
"mr. herbert," said wemmick, "after being all of a heap for half an 
hour, struck out a plan. he mentioned to me as a secret, that he is 
courting a young lady who has, as no doubt you are aware, a 
bedridden pa. which pa, having been in the purser line of life, 
lies a-bed in a bow-window where he can see the ships sail up and 
down the river. you are acquainted with the young lady, most 
probably?" 
"not personally," said i. 
the truth was, that she had objected to me as an expensive 
companion who did herbert no good, and that, when herbert had first 
proposed to present me to her, she had received the proposal with 
such very moderate warmth, that herbert had felt himself obliged to 
confide the state of the case to me, with a view to the lapse of a 
little time before i made her acquaintance. when i had begun to 
advance herbert's prospects by stealth, i had been able to bear 
this with cheerful philosophy; he and his affianced, for their 
part, had naturally not been very anxious to introduce a third 
person into their interviews; and thus, although i was assured that 
i had risen in clara's esteem, and although the young lady and i 
had long regularly interchanged messages and remembrances by 
herbert, i had never seen her. however, i did not trouble wemmick 
with these particulars. 
"the house with the bow-window," said wemmick, "being by the 
river-side, down the pool there between limehouse and greenwich, 
and being kept, it seems, by a very respectable widow who has a 
furnished upper floor to let, mr. herbert put it to me, what did i 
think of that as a temporary tenement for tom, jack, or richard? 
now, i thought very well of it, for three reasons i'll give you. 
that is to say. firstly. it's altogether out of all your beats, and 
is well away from the usual heap of streets great and small. 
secondly. without going near it yourself, you could always hear of 
the safety of tom, jack, or richard, through mr. herbert. thirdly. 
after a while and when it might be prudent, if you should want to 
slip tom, jack, or richard, on board a foreign packet-boat, there 
he is - ready." 
much comforted by these considerations, i thanked wemmick again and 
again, and begged him to proceed. 
"well, sir! mr. herbert threw himself into the business with a will, 
and by nine o'clock last night he housed tom, jack, or richard - 
whichever it may be - you and i don't want to know - quite 
successfully. at the old lodgings it was understood that he was 
summoned to dover, and in fact he was taken down the dover road and 
cornered out of it. now, another great advantage of all this, is, 
that it was done without you, and when, if any one was concerning 
himself about your movements, you must be known to be ever so many 
miles off and quite otherwise engaged. this diverts suspicion and 
confuses it; and for the same reason i recommended that even if you 
came back last night, you should not go home. it brings in more 
confusion, and you want confusion." 
wemmick, having finished his breakfast, here looked at his watch, 
and began to get his coat on. 
"and now, mr. pip," said he, with his hands still in the sleeves, "i 
have probably done the most i can do; but if i can ever do more - 
from a walworth point of view, and in a strictly private and 
personal capacity - i shall be glad to do it. here's the address. 
there can be no harm in your going here to-night and seeing for 
yourself that all is well with tom, jack, or richard, before you go 
home - which is another reason for your not going home last night. 
but after you have gone home, don't go back here. you are very 
welcome, i am sure, mr. pip;" his hands were now out of his sleeves, 
and i was shaking them; "and let me finally impress one important 
point upon you." he laid his hands upon my shoulders, and added in 
a solemn whisper: "avail yourself of this evening to lay hold of 
his portable property. you don't know what may happen to him. don't 
let anything happen to the portable property." 
quite despairing of making my mind clear to wemmick on this point, 
i forbore to try. 
"time's up," said wemmick, "and i must be off. if you had nothing 
more pressing to do than to keep here till dark, that's what i 
should advise. you look very much worried, and it would do you good 
to have a perfectly quiet day with the aged - he'll be up presently 
and a little bit of - you remember the pig?" 
"of course," said i. 
"well; and a little bit of him. that sausage you toasted was his, 
and he was in all respects a first-rater. do try him, if it is only 
for old acquaintance sake. good-bye, aged parent!" in a cheery 
shout. 
"all right, john; all right, my boy!" piped the old man from 
within. 
i soon fell asleep before wemmick's fire, and the aged and i 
enjoyed one another's society by falling asleep before it more or 
less all day. we had loin of pork for dinner, and greens grown on 
the estate, and i nodded at the aged with a good intention whenever 
i failed to do it drowsily. when it was quite dark, i left the aged 
preparing the fire for toast; and i inferred from the number of 
teacups, as well as from his glances at the two little doors in the 
wall, that miss skiffins was expected. 
chapter 46 
eight o'clock had struck before i got into the air that was 
scented, not disagreeably, by the chips and shavings of the 
long-shore boatbuilders, and mast oar and block makers. all that 
water-side region of the upper and lower pool below bridge, was 
unknown ground to me, and when i struck down by the river, i found 
that the spot i wanted was not where i had supposed it to be, and 
was anything but easy to find. it was called mill pond bank, 
chinks's basin; and i had no other guide to chinks's basin than the 
old green copper rope-walk. 
it matters not what stranded ships repairing in dry docks i lost 
myself among, what old hulls of ships in course of being knocked to 
pieces, what ooze and slime and other dregs of tide, what yards of 
ship-builders and ship-breakers, what rusty anchors blindly biting 
into the ground though for years off duty, what mountainous country 
of accumulated casks and timber, how many rope-walks that were not 
the old green copper. after several times falling short of my 
destination and as often over-shooting it, i came unexpectedly 
round a corner, upon mill pond bank. it was a fresh kind of place, 
all circumstances considered, where the wind from the river had 
room to turn itself round; and there were two or three trees in it, 
and there was the stump of a ruined windmill, and there was the old 
green copper rope-walk - whose long and narrow vista i could trace 
in the moonlight, along a series of wooden frames set in the 
ground, that looked like superannuated haymaking-rakes which had 
grown old and lost most of their teeth. 
selecting from the few queer houses upon mill pond bank, a house 
with a wooden front and three stories of bow-window (not 
bay-window, which is another thing), i looked at the plate upon the 
door, and read there, mrs. whimple. that being the name i wanted, i 
knocked, and an elderly woman of a pleasant and thriving appearance 
responded. she was immediately deposed, however, by herbert, who 
silently led me into the parlour and shut the door. it was an odd 
sensation to see his very familiar face established quite at home 
in that very unfamiliar room and region; and i found myself looking 
at him, much as i looked at the corner-cupboard with the glass and 
china, the shells upon the chimney-piece, and the coloured 
engravings on the wall, representing the death of captain cook, a 
ship-launch, and his majesty king george the third in a 
state-coachman's wig, leather-breeches, and top-boots, on the 
terrace at windsor. 
"all is well, handel," said herbert, "and he is quite satisfied, 
though eager to see you. my dear girl is with her father; and if 
you'll wait till she comes down, i'll make you known to her, and 
then we'll go up-stairs. - that's her father." 
i had become aware of an alarming growling overhead, and had 
probably expressed the fact in my countenance. 
"i am afraid he is a sad old rascal," said herbert, smiling, "but i 
have never seen him. don't you smell rum? he is always at it." 
"at rum?" said i. 
"yes," returned herbert, "and you may suppose how mild it makes his 
gout. he persists, too, in keeping all the provisions upstairs in 
his room, and serving them out. he keeps them on shelves over his 
head, and will weigh them all. his room must be like a chandler's 
shop." 
while he thus spoke, the growling noise became a prolonged roar, 
and then died away. 
"what else can be the consequence," said herbert, in explanation, 
"if he will cut the cheese? a man with the gout in his right hand - 
and everywhere else - can't expect to get through a double 
gloucester without hurting himself." 
he seemed to have hurt himself very much, for he gave another 
furious roar. 
"to have provis for an upper lodger is quite a godsend to mrs. 
whimple," said herbert, "for of course people in general won't 
stand that noise. a curious place, handel; isn't it?" 
it was a curious place, indeed; but remarkably well kept and clean. 
"mrs. whimple," said herbert, when i told him so, "is the best of 
housewives, and i really do not know what my clara would do without 
her motherly help. for, clara has no mother of her own, handel, and 
no relation in the world but old gruffandgrim." 
"surely that's not his name, herbert?" 
"no, no," said herbert, "that's my name for him. his name is mr. 
barley. but what a blessing it is for the son of my father and 
mother, to love a girl who has no relations, and who can never 
bother herself, or anybody else, about her family!" 
herbert had told me on former occasions, and now reminded me, that 
he first knew miss clara barley when she was completing her 
education at an establishment at hammersmith, and that on her being 
recalled home to nurse her father, he and she had confided their 
affection to the motherly mrs. whimple, by whom it had been fostered 
and regulated with equal kindness and discretion, ever since. it 
was understood that nothing of a tender nature could possibly be 
confided to old barley, by reason of his being totally unequal to 
the consideration of any subject more psychological than gout, rum, 
and purser's stores. 
as we were thus conversing in a low tone while old barley's 
sustained growl vibrated in the beam that crossed the ceiling, the 
room door opened, and a very pretty slight dark-eyed girl of twenty 
or so, came in with a basket in her hand: whom herbert tenderly 
relieved of the basket, and presented blushing, as "clara." she 
really was a most charming girl, and might have passed for a 
captive fairy, whom that truculent ogre, old barley, had pressed 
into his service. 
"look here," said herbert, showing me the basket, with a 
compassionate and tender smile after we had talked a little; 
"here's poor clara's supper, served out every night. here's her 
allowance of bread, and here's her slice of cheese, and here's her 
rum - which i drink. this is mr. barley's breakfast for to-morrow, 
served out to be cooked. two mutton chops, three potatoes, some 
split peas, a little flour, two ounces of butter, a pinch of salt, 
and all this black pepper. it's stewed up together, and taken hot, 
and it's a nice thing for the gout, i should think!" 
there was something so natural and winning in clara's resigned way 
of looking at these stores in detail, as herbert pointed them out, 
and something so confiding, loving, and innocent, in her modest 
manner of yielding herself to herbert's embracing arm - and 
something so gentle in her, so much needing protection on mill pond 
bank, by chinks's basin, and the old green copper rope-walk, with 
old barley growling in the beam - that i would not have undone the 
engagement between her and herbert, for all the money in the 
pocket-book i had never opened. 
i was looking at her with pleasure and admiration, when suddenly 
the growl swelled into a roar again, and a frightful bumping noise 
was heard above, as if a giant with a wooden leg were trying to 
bore it through the ceiling to come to us. upon this clara said to 
herbert, "papa wants me, darling!" and ran away. 
"there is an unconscionable old shark for you!" said herbert. "what 
do you suppose he wants now, handel?" 
"i don't know," said i. "something to drink?" 
"that's it!" cried herbert, as if i had made a guess of 
extraordinary merit. "he keeps his grog ready-mixed in a little tub 
on the table. wait a moment, and you'll hear clara lift him up to 
take some. - there he goes!" another roar, with a prolonged shake 
at the end. "now," said herbert, as it was succeeded by silence, 
"he's drinking. now," said herbert, as the growl resounded in the 
beam once more, "he's down again on his back!" 
clara returned soon afterwards, and herbert accompanied me 
up-stairs to see our charge. as we passed mr. barley's door, he was 
heard hoarsely muttering within, in a strain that rose and fell 
like wind, the following refrain; in which i substitute good wishes 
for something quite the reverse. 
"ahoy! bless your eyes, here's old bill barley. here's old bill 
barley, bless your eyes. here's old bill barley on the flat of his 
back, by the lord. lying on the flat of his back, like a drifting 
old dead flounder, here's your old bill barley, bless your eyes. 
ahoy! bless you." 
in this strain of consolation, herbert informed me the invisible 
barley would commune with himself by the day and night together; 
often while it was light, having, at the same time, one eye at a 
telescope which was fitted on his bed for the convenience of 
sweeping the river. 
in his two cabin rooms at the top of the house, which were fresh 
and airy, and in which mr. barley was less audible than below, i 
found provis comfortably settled. he expressed no alarm, and seemed 
to feel none that was worth mentioning; but it struck me that he 
was softened - indefinably, for i could not have said how, and could 
never afterwards recall how when i tried; but certainly. 
the opportunity that the day's rest had given me for reflection, 
had resulted in my fully determining to say nothing to him 
respecting compeyson. for anything i knew, his animosity towards 
the man might otherwise lead to his seeking him out and rushing on 
his own destruction. therefore, when herbert and i sat down with 
him by his fire, i asked him first of all whether he relied on 
wemmick's judgment and sources of information? 
"ay, ay, dear boy!" he answered, with a grave nod, "jaggers knows." 
"then, i have talked with wemmick," said i, "and have come to tell 
you what caution he gave me and what advice." 
this i did accurately, with the reservation just mentioned; and i 
told him how wemmick had heard, in newgate prison (whether from 
officers or prisoners i could not say), that he was under some 
suspicion, and that my chambers had been watched; how wemmick had 
recommended his keeping close for a time, and my keeping away from 
him; and what wemmick had said about getting him abroad. i added, 
that of course, when the time came, i should go with him, or should 
follow close upon him, as might be safest in wemmick's judgment. 
what was to follow that, i did not touch upon; neither indeed was i 
at all clear or comfortable about it in my own mind, now that i saw 
him in that softer condition, and in declared peril for my sake. as 
to altering my way of living, by enlarging my expenses, i put it to 
him whether in our present unsettled and difficult circumstances, 
it would not be simply ridiculous, if it were no worse? 
he could not deny this, and indeed was very reasonable throughout. 
his coming back was a venture, he said, and he had always known it 
to be a venture. he would do nothing to make it a desperate 
venture, and he had very little fear of his safety with such good 
help. 
herbert, who had been looking at the fire and pondering, here said 
that something had come into his thoughts arising out of wemmick's 
suggestion, which it might be worth while to pursue. "we are both 
good watermen, handel, and could take him down the river ourselves 
when the right time comes. no boat would then be hired for the 
purpose, and no boatmen; that would save at least a chance of 
suspicion, and any chance is worth saving. never mind the season; 
don't you think it might be a good thing if you began at once to 
keep a boat at the temple stairs, and were in the habit of rowing 
up and down the river? you fall into that habit, and then who 
notices or minds? do it twenty or fifty times, and there is nothing 
special in your doing it the twenty-first or fifty-first." 
i liked this scheme, and provis was quite elated by it. we agreed 
that it should be carried into execution, and that provis should 
never recognize us if we came below bridge and rowed past mill pond 
bank. but, we further agreed that he should pull down the blind in 
that part of his window which gave upon the east, whenever he saw 
us and all was right. 
our conference being now ended, and everything arranged, i rose to 
go; remarking to herbert that he and i had better not go home 
together, and that i would take half an hour's start of him. "i 
don't like to leave you here," i said to provis, "though i cannot 
doubt your being safer here than near me. good-bye!" 
"dear boy," he answered, clasping my hands, "i don't know when we 
may meet again, and i don't like good-bye. say good night!" 
"good night! herbert will go regularly between us, and when the 
time comes you may be certain i shall be ready. good night, good 
night!" 
we thought it best that he should stay in his own rooms, and we 
left him on the landing outside his door, holding a light over the 
stair-rail to light us down stairs. looking back at him, i thought 
of the first night of his return when our positions were reversed, 
and when i little supposed my heart could ever be as heavy and 
anxious at parting from him as it was now. 
old barley was growling and swearing when we repassed his door, 
with no appearance of having ceased or of meaning to cease. when we 
got to the foot of the stairs, i asked herbert whether he had 
preserved the name of provis. he replied, certainly not, and that 
the lodger was mr. campbell. he also explained that the utmost known 
of mr. campbell there, was, that he (herbert) had mr. campbell 
consigned to him, and felt a strong personal interest in his being 
well cared for, and living a secluded life. so, when we went into 
the parlour where mrs. whimple and clara were seated at work, i said 
nothing of my own interest in mr. campbell, but kept it to myself. 
when i had taken leave of the pretty gentle dark-eyed girl, and of 
the motherly woman who had not outlived her honest sympathy with a 
little affair of true love, i felt as if the old green copper 
rope-walk had grown quite a different place. old barley might be as 
old as the hills, and might swear like a whole field of troopers, 
but there were redeeming youth and trust and hope enough in 
chinks's basin to fill it to overflowing. and then i thought of 
estella, and of our parting, and went home very sadly. 
all things were as quiet in the temple as ever i had seen them. the 
windows of the rooms on that side, lately occupied by provis, were 
dark and still, and there was no lounger in garden court. i walked 
past the fountain twice or thrice before i descended the steps that 
were between me and my rooms, but i was quite alone. herbert coming 
to my bedside when he came in - for i went straight to bed, 
dispirited and fatigued - made the same report. opening one of the 
windows after that, he looked out into the moonlight, and told me 
that the pavement was a solemnly empty as the pavement of any 
cathedral at that same hour. 
next day, i set myself to get the boat. it was soon done, and the 
boat was brought round to the temple stairs, and lay where i could 
reach her within a minute or two. then, i began to go out as for 
training and practice: sometimes alone, sometimes with herbert. i 
was often out in cold, rain, and sleet, but nobody took much note 
of me after i had been out a few times. at first, i kept above 
blackfriars bridge; but as the hours of the tide changed, i took 
towards london bridge. it was old london bridge in those days, and 
at certain states of the tide there was a race and fall of water 
there which gave it a bad reputation. but i knew well enough how to 
"shoot" the bridge after seeing it done, and so began to row about 
among the shipping in the pool, and down to erith. the first time i 
passed mill pond bank, herbert and i were pulling a pair of oars; 
and, both in going and returning, we saw the blind towards the east 
come down. herbert was rarely there less frequently than three 
times in a week, and he never brought me a single word of 
intelligence that was at all alarming. still, i knew that there was 
cause for alarm, and i could not get rid of the notion of being 
watched. once received, it is a haunting idea; how many undesigning 
persons i suspected of watching me, it would be hard to calculate. 
in short, i was always full of fears for the rash man who was in 
hiding. herbert had sometimes said to me that he found it pleasant 
to stand at one of our windows after dark, when the tide was 
running down, and to think that it was flowing, with everything it 
bore, towards clara. but i thought with dread that it was flowing 
towards magwitch, and that any black mark on its surface might be 
his pursuers, going swiftly, silently, and surely, to take him. 
chapter 47 
some weeks passed without bringing any change. we waited for 
wemmick, and he made no sign. if i had never known him out of 
little britain, and had never enjoyed the privilege of being on a 
familiar footing at the castle, i might have doubted him; not so 
for a moment, knowing him as i did. 
my worldly affairs began to wear a gloomy appearance, and i was 
pressed for money by more than one creditor. even i myself began to 
know the want of money (i mean of ready money in my own pocket), 
and to relieve it by converting some easily spared articles of 
jewellery into cash. but i had quite determined that it would be a 
heartless fraud to take more money from my patron in the existing 
state of my uncertain thoughts and plans. therefore, i had sent him 
the unopened pocket-book by herbert, to hold in his own keeping, 
and i felt a kind of satisfaction - whether it was a false kind or 
a true, i hardly know - in not having profited by his generosity 
since his revelation of himself. 
as the time wore on, an impression settled heavily upon me that 
estella was married. fearful of having it confirmed, though it was 
all but a conviction, i avoided the newspapers, and begged herbert 
(to whom i had confided the circumstances of our last interview) 
never to speak of her to me. why i hoarded up this last wretched 
little rag of the robe of hope that was rent and given to the 
winds, how do i know! why did you who read this, commit that not 
dissimilar inconsistency of your own, last year, last month, last 
week? 
it was an unhappy life that i lived, and its one dominant anxiety, 
towering over all its other anxieties like a high mountain above a 
range of mountains, never disappeared from my view. still, no new 
cause for fear arose. let me start from my bed as i would, with the 
terror fresh upon me that he was discovered; let me sit listening 
as i would, with dread, for herbert's returning step at night, lest 
it should be fleeter than ordinary, and winged with evil news; for 
all that, and much more to like purpose, the round of things went 
on. condemned to inaction and a state of constant restlessness and 
suspense, i rowed about in my boat, and waited, waited, waited, as 
i best could. 
there were states of the tide when, having been down the river, i 
could not get back through the eddy-chafed arches and starlings of 
old london bridge; then, i left my boat at a wharf near the custom 
house, to be brought up afterwards to the temple stairs. i was not 
averse to doing this, as it served to make me and my boat a 
commoner incident among the water-side people there. from this 
slight occasion, sprang two meetings that i have now to tell of. 
one afternoon, late in the month of february, i came ashore at the 
wharf at dusk. i had pulled down as far as greenwich with the ebb 
tide, and had turned with the tide. it had been a fine bright day, 
but had become foggy as the sun dropped, and i had had to feel my 
way back among the shipping, pretty carefully. both in going and 
returning, i had seen the signal in his window, all well. 
as it was a raw evening and i was cold, i thought i would comfort 
myself with dinner at once; and as i had hours of dejection and 
solitude before me if i went home to the temple, i thought i would 
afterwards go to the play. the theatre where mr. wopsle had achieved 
his questionable triumph, was in that waterside neighbourhood (it 
is nowhere now), and to that theatre i resolved to go. i was aware 
that mr. wopsle had not succeeded in reviving the drama, but, on the 
contrary, had rather partaken of its decline. he had been ominously 
heard of, through the playbills, as a faithful black, in connexion 
with a little girl of noble birth, and a monkey. and herbert had 
seen him as a predatory tartar of comic propensities, with a face 
like a red brick, and an outrageous hat all over bells. 
i dined at what herbert and i used to call a geographical 
chop-house - where there were maps of the world in porter-pot rims 
on every half-yard of the table-cloths, and charts of gravy on 
every one of the knives - to this day there is scarcely a single 
chop-house within the lord mayor's dominions which is not 
geographical - and wore out the time in dozing over crumbs, staring 
at gas, and baking in a hot blast of dinners. by-and-by, i roused 
myself and went to the play. 
there, i found a virtuous boatswain in his majesty's service - a 
most excellent man, though i could have wished his trousers not 
quite so tight in some places and not quite so loose in others - 
who knocked all the little men's hats over their eyes, though he 
was very generous and brave, and who wouldn't hear of anybody's 
paying taxes, though he was very patriotic. he had a bag of money 
in his pocket, like a pudding in the cloth, and on that property 
married a young person in bed-furniture, with great rejoicings; the 
whole population of portsmouth (nine in number at the last census) 
turning out on the beach, to rub their own hands and shake 
everybody else's, and sing "fill, fill!" a certain 
dark-complexioned swab, however, who wouldn't fill, or do anything 
else that was proposed to him, and whose heart was openly stated 
(by the boatswain) to be as black as his figure-head, proposed to 
two other swabs to get all mankind into difficulties; which was so 
effectually done (the swab family having considerable political 
influence) that it took half the evening to set things right, and 
then it was only brought about through an honest little grocer with 
a white hat, black gaiters, and red nose, getting into a clock, 
with a gridiron, and listening, and coming out, and knocking 
everybody down from behind with the gridiron whom he couldn't 
confute with what he had overheard. this led to mr. wopsle's (who 
had never been heard of before) coming in with a star and garter 
on, as a plenipotentiary of great power direct from the admiralty, 
to say that the swabs were all to go to prison on the spot, and 
that he had brought the boatswain down the union jack, as a slight 
acknowledgment of his public services. the boatswain, unmanned for 
the first time, respectfully dried his eyes on the jack, and then 
cheering up and addressing mr. wopsle as your honour, solicited 
permission to take him by the fin. mr. wopsle conceding his fin with 
a gracious dignity, was immediately shoved into a dusty corner 
while everybody danced a hornpipe; and from that corner, surveying 
the public with a discontented eye, became aware of me. 
the second piece was the last new grand comic christmas pantomime, 
in the first scene of which, it pained me to suspect that i 
detected mr. wopsle with red worsted legs under a highly magnified 
phosphoric countenance and a shock of red curtain-fringe for his 
hair, engaged in the manufacture of thunderbolts in a mine, and 
displaying great cowardice when his gigantic master came home (very 
hoarse) to dinner. but he presently presented himself under 
worthier circumstances; for, the genius of youthful love being in 
want of assistance - on account of the parental brutality of an 
ignorant farmer who opposed the choice of his daughter's heart, by 
purposely falling upon the object, in a flour sack, out of the 
firstfloor window - summoned a sententious enchanter; and he, 
coming up from the antipodes rather unsteadily, after an apparently 
violent journey, proved to be mr. wopsle in a high-crowned hat, with 
a necromantic work in one volume under his arm. the business of 
this enchanter on earth, being principally to be talked at, sung 
at, butted at, danced at, and flashed at with fires of various 
colours, he had a good deal of time on his hands. and i observed 
with great surprise, that he devoted it to staring in my direction 
as if he were lost in amazement. 
there was something so remarkable in the increasing glare of mr. 
wopsle's eye, and he seemed to be turning so many things over in 
his mind and to grow so confused, that i could not make it out. i 
sat thinking of it, long after he had ascended to the clouds in a 
large watch-case, and still i could not make it out. i was still 
thinking of it when i came out of the theatre an hour afterwards, 
and found him waiting for me near the door. 
"how do you do?" said i, shaking hands with him as we turned down 
the street together. "i saw that you saw me." 
"saw you, mr. pip!" he returned. "yes, of course i saw you. but who 
else was there?" 
"who else?" 
"it is the strangest thing," said mr. wopsle, drifting into his lost 
look again; "and yet i could swear to him." 
becoming alarmed, i entreated mr. wopsle to explain his meaning. 
"whether i should have noticed him at first but for your being 
there," said mr. wopsle, going on in the same lost way, "i can't be 
positive; yet i think i should." 
involuntarily i looked round me, as i was accustomed to look round 
me when i went home; for, these mysterious words gave me a chill. 
"oh! he can't be in sight," said mr. wopsle. "he went out, before i 
went off, i saw him go." 
having the reason that i had, for being suspicious, i even 
suspected this poor actor. i mistrusted a design to entrap me into 
some admission. therefore, i glanced at him as we walked on 
together, but said nothing. 
"i had a ridiculous fancy that he must be with you, mr. pip, till i 
saw that you were quite unconscious of him, sitting behind you 
there, like a ghost." 
my former chill crept over me again, but i was resolved not to 
speak yet, for it was quite consistent with his words that he might 
be set on to induce me to connect these references with provis. of 
course, i was perfectly sure and safe that provis had not been 
there. 
"i dare say you wonder at me, mr. pip; indeed i see you do. but it 
is so very strange! you'll hardly believe what i am going to tell 
you. i could hardly believe it myself, if you told me." 
"indeed?" said i. 
"no, indeed. mr. pip, you remember in old times a certain christmas 
day, when you were quite a child, and i dined at gargery's, and 
some soldiers came to the door to get a pair of handcuffs mended?" 
"i remember it very well." 
"and you remember that there was a chase after two convicts, and 
that we joined in it, and that gargery took you on his back, and 
that i took the lead and you kept up with me as well as you could?" 
"i remember it all very well." better than he thought - except the 
last clause. 
"and you remember that we came up with the two in a ditch, and that 
there was a scuffle between them, and that one of them had been 
severely handled and much mauled about the face, by the other?" 
"i see it all before me." 
"and that the soldiers lighted torches, and put the two in the 
centre, and that we went on to see the last of them, over the black 
marshes, with the torchlight shining on their faces - i am 
particular about that; with the torchlight shining on their faces, 
when there was an outer ring of dark night all about us?" 
"yes," said i. "i remember all that." 
"then, mr. pip, one of those two prisoners sat behind you tonight. i 
saw him over your shoulder." 
"steady!" i thought. i asked him then, "which of the two do you 
suppose you saw?" 
"the one who had been mauled," he answered readily, "and i'll swear 
i saw him! the more i think of him, the more certain i am of him." 
"this is very curious!" said i, with the best assumption i could 
put on, of its being nothing more to me. "very curious indeed!" 
i cannot exaggerate the enhanced disquiet into which this 
conversation threw me, or the special and peculiar terror i felt at 
compeyson's having been behind me "like a ghost." for, if he had 
ever been out of my thoughts for a few moments together since the 
hiding had begun, it was in those very moments when he was closest 
to me; and to think that i should be so unconscious and off my 
guard after all my care, was as if i had shut an avenue of a 
hundred doors to keep him out, and then had found him at my elbow. 
i could not doubt either that he was there, because i was there, 
and that however slight an appearance of danger there might be 
about us, danger was always near and active. 
i put such questions to mr. wopsle as, when did the man come in? he 
could not tell me that; he saw me, and over my shoulder he saw the 
man. it was not until he had seen him for some time that he began 
to identify him; but he had from the first vaguely associated him 
with me, and known him as somehow belonging to me in the old 
village time. how was he dressed? prosperously, but not noticeably 
otherwise; he thought, in black. was his face at all disfigured? 
no, he believed not. i believed not, too, for, although in my 
brooding state i had taken no especial notice of the people behind 
me, i thought it likely that a face at all disfigured would have 
attracted my attention. 
when mr. wopsle had imparted to me all that he could recall or i 
extract, and when i had treated him to a little appropriate 
refreshment after the fatigues of the evening, we parted. it was 
between twelve and one o'clock when i reached the temple, and the 
gates were shut. no one was near me when i went in and went home. 
herbert had come in, and we held a very serious council by the 
fire. but there was nothing to be done, saving to communicate to 
wemmick what i had that night found out, and to remind him that we 
waited for his hint. as i thought that i might compromise him if i 
went too often to the castle, i made this communication by letter. 
i wrote it before i went to bed, and went out and posted it; and 
again no one was near me. herbert and i agreed that we could do 
nothing else but be very cautious. and we were very cautious indeed 
more cautious than before, if that were possible - and i for my 
part never went near chinks's basin, except when i rowed by, and 
then i only looked at mill pond bank as i looked at anything else. 
chapter 48 
the second of the two meetings referred to in the last chapter, 
occurred about a week after the first. i had again left my boat at 
the wharf below bridge; the time was an hour earlier in the 
afternoon; and, undecided where to dine, i had strolled up into 
cheapside, and was strolling along it, surely the most unsettled 
person in all the busy concourse, when a large hand was laid upon 
my shoulder, by some one overtaking me. it was mr. jaggers's hand, 
and he passed it through my arm. 
"as we are going in the same direction, pip, we may walk together. 
where are you bound for?" 
"for the temple, i think," said i. 
"don't you know?" said mr. jaggers. 
"well," i returned, glad for once to get the better of him in 
cross-examination, "i do not know, for i have not made up my mind." 
"you are going to dine?" said mr. jaggers. "you don't mind admitting 
that, i suppose?" 
"no," i returned, "i don't mind admitting that." 
"and are not engaged?" 
"i don't mind admitting also, that i am not engaged." 
"then," said mr. jaggers, "come and dine with me." 
i was going to excuse myself, when he added, "wemmick's coming." 
so, i changed my excuse into an acceptance - the few words i had 
uttered, serving for the beginning of either - and we went along 
cheapside and slanted off to little britain, while the lights were 
springing up brilliantly in the shop windows, and the street 
lamp-lighters, scarcely finding ground enough to plant their 
ladders on in the midst of the afternoon's bustle, were skipping up 
and down and running in and out, opening more red eyes in the 
gathering fog than my rushlight tower at the hummums had opened 
white eyes in the ghostly wall. 
at the office in little britain there was the usual letter-writing, 
hand-washing, candle-snuffing, and safe-locking, that closed the 
business of the day. as i stood idle by mr. jaggers's fire, its 
rising and falling flame made the two casts on the shelf look as if 
they were playing a diabolical game at bo-peep with me; while the 
pair of coarse fat office candles that dimly lighted mr. jaggers as 
he wrote in a corner, were decorated with dirty winding-sheets, as 
if in remembrance of a host of hanged clients. 
we went to gerrard-street, all three together, in a hackney coach: 
and as soon as we got there, dinner was served. although i should 
not have thought of making, in that place, the most distant 
reference by so much as a look to wemmick's walworth sentiments, 
yet i should have had no objection to catching his eye now and then 
in a friendly way. but it was not to be done. he turned his eyes on 
mr. jaggers whenever he raised them from the table, and was as dry 
and distant to me as if there were twin wemmicks and this was the 
wrong one. 
"did you send that note of miss havisham's to mr. pip, wemmick?" mr. 
jaggers asked, soon after we began dinner. 
"no, sir," returned wemmick; "it was going by post, when you 
brought mr. pip into the office. here it is." he handed it to his 
principal, instead of to me. 
"it's a note of two lines, pip," said mr. jaggers, handing it on, 
"sent up to me by miss havisham, on account of her not being sure 
of your address. she tells me that she wants to see you on a little 
matter of business you mentioned to her. you'll go down?" 
"yes," said i, casting my eyes over the note, which was exactly in 
those terms. 
"when do you think of going down?" 
"i have an impending engagement," said i, glancing at wemmick, who 
was putting fish into the post-office, "that renders me rather 
uncertain of my time. at once, i think." 
"if mr. pip has the intention of going at once," said wemmick to mr. 
jaggers, "he needn't write an answer, you know." 
receiving this as an intimation that it was best not to delay, i 
settled that i would go to-morrow, and said so. wemmick drank a 
glass of wine and looked with a grimly satisfied air at mr. jaggers, 
but not at me. 
"so, pip! our friend the spider," said mr. jaggers, "has played his 
cards. he has won the pool." 
it was as much as i could do to assent. 
"hah! he is a promising fellow - in his way - but he may not have 
it all his own way. the stronger will win in the end, but the 
stronger has to be found out first. if he should turn to, and beat 
her-" 
"surely," i interrupted, with a burning face and heart, "you do not 
seriously think that he is scoundrel enough for that, mr. jaggers?" 
"i didn't say so, pip. i am putting a case. if he should turn to 
and beat her, he may possibly get the strength on his side; if it 
should be a question of intellect, he certainly will not. it would 
be chance work to give an opinion how a fellow of that sort will 
turn out in such circumstances, because it's a toss-up between two 
results." 
"may i ask what they are?" 
"a fellow like our friend the spider," answered mr. jaggers, "either 
beats, or cringes. he may cringe and growl, or cringe and not 
growl; but he either beats or cringes. ask wemmick his opinion." 
"either beats or cringes," said wemmick, not at all addressing 
himself to me. 
"so, here's to mrs. bentley drummle," said mr. jaggers, taking a 
decanter of choicer wine from his dumb-waiter, and filling for each 
of us and for himself, "and may the question of supremacy be 
settled to the lady's satisfaction! to the satisfaction of the lady 
and the gentleman, it never will be. now, molly, molly, molly, 
molly, how slow you are to-day!" 
she was at his elbow when he addressed her, putting a dish upon the 
table. as she withdrew her hands from it, she fell back a step or 
two, nervously muttering some excuse. and a certain action of her 
fingers as she spoke arrested my attention. 
"what's the matter?" said mr. jaggers. 
"nothing. only the subject we were speaking of," said i, "was 
rather painful to me." 
the action of her fingers was like the action of knitting. she 
stood looking at her master, not understanding whether she was free 
to go, or whether he had more to say to her and would call her back 
if she did go. her look was very intent. surely, i had seen exactly 
such eyes and such hands, on a memorable occasion very lately! 
he dismissed her, and she glided out of the room. but she remained 
before me, as plainly as if she were still there. i looked at those 
hands, i looked at those eyes, i looked at that flowing hair; and i 
compared them with other hands, other eyes, other hair, that i knew 
of, and with what those might be after twenty years of a brutal 
husband and a stormy life. i looked again at those hands and eyes 
of the housekeeper, and thought of the inexplicable feeling that 
had come over me when i last walked - not alone - in the ruined 
garden, and through the deserted brewery. i thought how the same 
feeling had come back when i saw a face looking at me, and a hand 
waving to me, from a stage-coach window; and how it had come back 
again and had flashed about me like lightning, when i had passed in 
a carriage - not alone - through a sudden glare of light in a dark 
street. i thought how one link of association had helped that 
identification in the theatre, and how such a link, wanting before, 
had been riveted for me now, when i had passed by a chance swift 
from estella's name to the fingers with their knitting action, and 
the attentive eyes. and i felt absolutely certain that this woman 
was estella's mother. 
mr. jaggers had seen me with estella, and was not likely to have 
missed the sentiments i had been at no pains to conceal. he nodded 
when i said the subject was painful to me, clapped me on the back, 
put round the wine again, and went on with his dinner. 
only twice more, did the housekeeper reappear, and then her stay in 
the room was very short, and mr. jaggers was sharp with her. but her 
hands were estella's hands, and her eyes were estella's eyes, and 
if she had reappeared a hundred times i could have been neither 
more sure nor less sure that my conviction was the truth. 
it was a dull evening, for wemmick drew his wine when it came 
round, quite as a matter of business - just as he might have drawn 
his salary when that came round - and with his eyes on his chief, 
sat in a state of perpetual readiness for cross-examination. as to 
the quantity of wine, his post-office was as indifferent and ready 
as any other post-office for its quantity of letters. from my point 
of view, he was the wrong twin all the time, and only externally 
like the wemmick of walworth. 
we took our leave early, and left together. even when we were 
groping among mr. jaggers's stock of boots for our hats, i felt that 
the right twin was on his way back; and we had not gone half a 
dozen yards down gerrard-street in the walworth direction before i 
found that i was walking arm-in-arm with the right twin, and that 
the wrong twin had evaporated into the evening air. 
"well!" said wemmick, "that's over! he's a wonderful man, without 
his living likeness; but i feel that i have to screw myself up when 
i dine with him - and i dine more comfortably unscrewed." 
i felt that this was a good statement of the case, and told him so. 
"wouldn't say it to anybody but yourself," he answered. "i know 
that what is said between you and me, goes no further." 
i asked him if he had ever seen miss havisham's adopted daughter, 
mrs. bentley drummle? he said no. to avoid being too abrupt, i then 
spoke of the aged, and of miss skiffins. he looked rather sly when 
i mentioned miss skiffins, and stopped in the street to blow his 
nose, with a roll of the head and a flourish not quite free from 
latent boastfulness. 
"wemmick," said i, "do you remember telling me before i first went 
to mr. jaggers's private house, to notice that housekeeper?" 
"did i?" he replied. "ah, i dare say i did. deuce take me," he 
added, suddenly, "i know i did. i find i am not quite unscrewed 
yet." 
"a wild beast tamed, you called her." 
"and what do you call her?" 
"the same. how did mr. jaggers tame her, wemmick?" 
"that's his secret. she has been with him many a long year." 
"i wish you would tell me her story. i feel a particular interest 
in being acquainted with it. you know that what is said between you 
and me goes no further." 
"well!" wemmick replied, "i don't know her story - that is, i don't 
know all of it. but what i do know, i'll tell you. we are in our 
private and personal capacities, of course." 
"of course." 
"a score or so of years ago, that woman was tried at the old bailey 
for murder, and was acquitted. she was a very handsome young woman, 
and i believe had some gipsy blood in her. anyhow, it was hot enough 
when it was up, as you may suppose." 
"but she was acquitted." 
"mr. jaggers was for her," pursued wemmick, with a look full of 
meaning, "and worked the case in a way quite astonishing. it was a 
desperate case, and it was comparatively early days with him then, 
and he worked it to general admiration; in fact, it may almost be 
said to have made him. he worked it himself at the police-office, 
day after day for many days, contending against even a committal; 
and at the trial where he couldn't work it himself, sat under 
counsel, and - every one knew - put in all the salt and pepper. the 
murdered person was a woman; a woman, a good ten years older, very 
much larger, and very much stronger. it was a case of jealousy. 
they both led tramping lives, and this woman in gerrard-street here 
had been married very young, over the broomstick (as we say), to a 
tramping man, and was a perfect fury in point of jealousy. the 
murdered woman - more a match for the man, certainly, in point of 
years - was found dead in a barn near hounslow heath. there had 
been a violent struggle, perhaps a fight. she was bruised and 
scratched and torn, and had been held by the throat at last and 
choked. now, there was no reasonable evidence to implicate any 
person but this woman, and, on the improbabilities of her having 
been able to do it, mr. jaggers principally rested his case. you may 
be sure," said wemmick, touching me on the sleeve, "that he never 
dwelt upon the strength of her hands then, though he sometimes does 
now." 
i had told wemmick of his showing us her wrists, that day of the 
dinner party. 
"well, sir!" wemmick went on; "it happened - happened, don't you 
see? - that this woman was so very artfully dressed from the time 
of her apprehension, that she looked much slighter than she really 
was; in particular, her sleeves are always remembered to have been 
so skilfully contrived that her arms had quite a delicate look. she 
had only a bruise or two about her - nothing for a tramp - but the 
backs of her hands were lacerated, and the question was, was it 
with finger-nails? now, mr. jaggers showed that she had struggled 
through a great lot of brambles which were not as high as her face; 
but which she could not have got through and kept her hands out of; 
and bits of those brambles were actually found in her skin and put 
in evidence, as well as the fact that the brambles in question were 
found on examination to have been broken through, and to have 
little shreds of her dress and little spots of blood upon them here 
and there. but the boldest point he made, was this. it was 
attempted to be set up in proof of her jealousy, that she was under 
strong suspicion of having, at about the time of the murder, 
frantically destroyed her child by this man - some three years old 
to revenge herself upon him. mr. jaggers worked that, in this way. 
"we say these are not marks of finger-nails, but marks of brambles, 
and we show you the brambles. you say they are marks of 
finger-nails, and you set up the hypothesis that she destroyed her 
child. you must accept all consequences of that hypothesis. for 
anything we know, she may have destroyed her child, and the child 
in clinging to her may have scratched her hands. what then? you are 
not trying her for the murder of her child; why don't you? as to 
this case, if you will have scratches, we say that, for anything we 
know, you may have accounted for them, assuming for the sake of 
argument that you have not invented them!" to sum up, sir," said 
wemmick, "mr. jaggers was altogether too many for the jury, and they 
gave in." 
"has she been in his service ever since?" 
"yes; but not only that," said wemmick. "she went into his service 
immediately after her acquittal, tamed as she is now. she has since 
been taught one thing and another in the way of her duties, but she 
was tamed from the beginning." 
"do you remember the sex of the child?" 
"said to have been a girl." 
"you have nothing more to say to me to-night?" 
"nothing. i got your letter and destroyed it. nothing." 
we exchanged a cordial good night, and i went home, with new matter 
for my thoughts, though with no relief from the old. 
chapter 49 
putting miss havisham's note in my pocket, that it might serve as 
my credentials for so soon reappearing at satis house, in case her 
waywardness should lead her to express any surprise at seeing me, i 
went down again by the coach next day. but i alighted at the 
halfway house, and breakfasted there, and walked the rest of the 
distance; for, i sought to get into the town quietly by the 
unfrequented ways, and to leave it in the same manner. 
the best light of the day was gone when i passed along the quiet 
echoing courts behind the high-street. the nooks of ruin where the 
old monks had once had their refectories and gardens, and where the 
strong walls were now pressed into the service of humble sheds and 
stables, were almost as silent as the old monks in their graves. 
the cathedral chimes had at once a sadder and a more remote sound 
to me, as i hurried on avoiding observation, than they had ever had 
before; so, the swell of the old organ was borne to my ears like 
funeral music; and the rooks, as they hovered about the grey tower 
and swung in the bare high trees of the priory-garden, seemed to 
call to me that the place was changed, and that estella was gone 
out of it for ever. 
an elderly woman whom i had seen before as one of the servants who 
lived in the supplementary house across the back court-yard, opened 
the gate. the lighted candle stood in the dark passage within, as 
of old, and i took it up and ascended the staircase alone. miss 
havisham was not in her own room, but was in the larger room across 
the landing. looking in at the door, after knocking in vain, i saw 
her sitting on the hearth in a ragged chair, close before, and lost 
in the contemplation of, the ashy fire. 
doing as i had often done, i went in, and stood, touching the old 
chimney-piece, where she could see me when she raised her eyes. 
there was an air or utter loneliness upon her, that would have 
moved me to pity though she had wilfully done me a deeper injury 
than i could charge her with. as i stood compassionating her, and 
thinking how in the progress of time i too had come to be a part of 
the wrecked fortunes of that house, her eyes rested on me. she 
stared, and said in a low voice, "is it real?" 
"it is i, pip. mr. jaggers gave me your note yesterday, and i have 
lost no time." 
"thank you. thank you." 
as i brought another of the ragged chairs to the hearth and sat 
down, i remarked a new expression on her face, as if she were 
afraid of me. 
"i want," she said, "to pursue that subject you mentioned to me 
when you were last here, and to show you that i am not all stone. 
but perhaps you can never believe, now, that there is anything 
human in my heart?" 
when i said some reassuring words, she stretched out her tremulous 
right hand, as though she was going to touch me; but she recalled 
it again before i understood the action, or knew how to receive it. 
"you said, speaking for your friend, that you could tell me how to 
do something useful and good. something that you would like done, 
is it not?" 
"something that i would like done very much." 
"what is it?" 
i began explaining to her that secret history of the partnership. i 
had not got far into it, when i judged from her looks that she was 
thinking in a discursive way of me, rather than of what i said. it 
seemed to be so, for, when i stopped speaking, many moments passed 
before she showed that she was conscious of the fact. 
"do you break off," she asked then, with her former air of being 
afraid of me, "because you hate me too much to bear to speak to 
me?" 
"no, no," i answered, "how can you think so, miss havisham! i 
stopped because i thought you were not following what i said." 
"perhaps i was not," she answered, putting a hand to her head. 
"begin again, and let me look at something else. stay! now tell 
me." 
she set her hand upon her stick, in the resolute way that sometimes 
was habitual to her, and looked at the fire with a strong 
expression of forcing herself to attend. i went on with my 
explanation, and told her how i had hoped to complete the 
transaction out of my means, but how in this i was disappointed. 
that part of the subject (i reminded her) involved matters which 
could form no part of my explanation, for they were the weighty 
secrets of another. 
"so!" said she, assenting with her head, but not looking at me. 
"and how much money is wanting to complete the purchase?" 
i was rather afraid of stating it, for it sounded a large sum. 
"nine hundred pounds." 
"if i give you the money for this purpose, will you keep my secret 
as you have kept your own?" 
"quite as faithfully." 
"and your mind will be more at rest?" 
"much more at rest." 
"are you very unhappy now?" 
she asked this question, still without looking at me, but in an 
unwonted tone of sympathy. i could not reply at the moment, for my 
voice failed me. she put her left arm across the head of her stick, 
and softly laid her forehead on it. 
"i am far from happy, miss havisham; but i have other causes of 
disquiet than any you know of. they are the secrets i have 
mentioned." 
after a little while, she raised her head and looked at the fire 
again. 
"it is noble in you to tell me that you have other causes of 
unhappiness, is it true?" 
"too true." 
"can i only serve you, pip, by serving your friend? regarding that 
as done, is there nothing i can do for you yourself?" 
"nothing. i thank you for the question. i thank you even more for 
the tone of the question. but, there is nothing." 
she presently rose from her seat, and looked about the blighted 
room for the means of writing. there were non there, and she took 
from her pocket a yellow set of ivory tablets, mounted in tarnished 
gold, and wrote upon them with a pencil in a case of tarnished gold 
that hung from her neck. 
"you are still on friendly terms with mr. jaggers?" 
"quite. i dined with him yesterday." 
"this is an authority to him to pay you that money, to lay out at 
your irresponsible discretion for your friend. i keep no money 
here; but if you would rather mr. jaggers knew nothing of the 
matter, i will send it to you." 
"thank you, miss havisham; i have not the least objection to 
receiving it from him." 
she read me what she had written, and it was direct and clear, and 
evidently intended to absolve me from any suspicion of profiting by 
the receipt of the money. i took the tablets from her hand, and it 
trembled again, and it trembled more as she took off the chain to 
which the pencil was attached, and put it in mine. all this she 
did, without looking at me. 
"my name is on the first leaf. if you can ever write under my name, 
"i forgive her," though ever so long after my broken heart is dust 
pray do it!" 
"o miss havisham," said i, "i can do it now. there have been sore 
mistakes; and my life has been a blind and thankless one; and i 
want forgiveness and direction far too much, to be bitter with 
you." 
she turned her face to me for the first time since she had averted 
it, and, to my amazement, i may even add to my terror, dropped on 
her knees at my feet; with her folded hands raised to me in the 
manner in which, when her poor heart was young and fresh and whole, 
they must often have been raised to heaven from her mother's side. 
to see her with her white hair and her worn face kneeling at my 
feet, gave me a shock through all my frame. i entreated her to 
rise, and got my arms about her to help her up; but she only 
pressed that hand of mine which was nearest to her grasp, and hung 
her head over it and wept. i had never seen her shed a tear before, 
and, in the hope that the relief might do her good, i bent over her 
without speaking. she was not kneeling now, but was down upon the 
ground. 
"o!" she cried, despairingly. "what have i done! what have i done!" 
"if you mean, miss havisham, what have you done to injure me, let 
me answer. very little. i should have loved her under any 
circumstances. - is she married?" 
"yes." 
it was a needless question, for a new desolation in the desolate 
house had told me so. 
"what have i done! what have i done!" she wrung her hands, and 
crushed her white hair, and returned to this cry over and over 
again. "what have i done!" 
i knew not how to answer, or how to comfort her. that she had done 
a grievous thing in taking an impressionable child to mould into 
the form that her wild resentment, spurned affection, and wounded 
pride, found vengeance in, i knew full well. but that, in shutting 
out the light of day, she had shut out infinitely more; that, in 
seclusion, she had secluded herself from a thousand natural and 
healing influences; that, her mind, brooding solitary, had grown 
diseased, as all minds do and must and will that reverse the 
appointed order of their maker; i knew equally well. and could i 
look upon her without compassion, seeing her punishment in the ruin 
she was, in her profound unfitness for this earth on which she was 
placed, in the vanity of sorrow which had become a master mania, 
like the vanity of penitence, the vanity of remorse, the vanity of 
unworthiness, and other monstrous vanities that have been curses in 
this world? 
"until you spoke to her the other day, and until i saw in you a 
looking-glass that showed me what i once felt myself, i did not 
know what i had done. what have i done! what have i done!" and so 
again, twenty, fifty times over, what had she done! 
"miss havisham," i said, when her cry had died away, "you may 
dismiss me from your mind and conscience. but estella is a 
different case, and if you can ever undo any scrap of what you have 
done amiss in keeping a part of her right nature away from her, it 
will be better to do that, than to bemoan the past through a 
hundred years." 
"yes, yes, i know it. but, pip - my dear!" there was an earnest 
womanly compassion for me in her new affection. "my dear! believe 
this: when she first came to me, i meant to save her from misery 
like my own. at first i meant no more." 
"well, well!" said i. "i hope so." 
"but as she grew, and promised to be very beautiful, i gradually 
did worse, and with my praises, and with my jewels, and with my 
teachings, and with this figure of myself always before her a 
warning to back and point my lessons, i stole her heart away and 
put ice in its place." 
"better," i could not help saying, "to have left her a natural 
heart, even to be bruised or broken." 
with that, miss havisham looked distractedly at me for a while, and 
then burst out again, what had she done! 
"if you knew all my story," she pleaded, "you would have some 
compassion for me and a better understanding of me." 
"miss havisham," i answered, as delicately as i could, "i believe i 
may say that i do know your story, and have known it ever since i 
first left this neighbourhood. it has inspired me with great 
commiseration, and i hope i understand it and its influences. does 
what has passed between us give me any excuse for asking you a 
question relative to estella? not as she is, but as she was when 
she first came here?" 
she was seated on the ground, with her arms on the ragged chair, 
and her head leaning on them. she looked full at me when i said 
this, and replied, "go on." 
"whose child was estella?" 
she shook her head. 
"you don't know?" 
she shook her head again. 
"but mr. jaggers brought her here, or sent her here?" 
"brought her here." 
"will you tell me how that came about?" 
she answered in a low whisper and with caution: "i had been shut up 
in these rooms a long time (i don't know how long; you know what 
time the clocks keep here), when i told him that i wanted a little 
girl to rear and love, and save from my fate. i had first seen him 
when i sent for him to lay this place waste for me; having read of 
him in the newspapers, before i and the world parted. he told me 
that he would look about him for such an orphan child. one night he 
brought her here asleep, and i called her estella." 
"might i ask her age then?" 
"two or three. she herself knows nothing, but that she was left an 
orphan and i adopted her." 
so convinced i was of that woman's being her mother, that i wanted 
no evidence to establish the fact in my own mind. but, to any mind, 
i thought, the connection here was clear and straight. 
what more could i hope to do by prolonging the interview? i had 
succeeded on behalf of herbert, miss havisham had told me all she 
knew of estella, i had said and done what i could to ease her mind. 
no matter with what other words we parted; we parted. 
twilight was closing in when i went down stairs into the natural 
air. i called to the woman who had opened the gate when i entered, 
that i would not trouble her just yet, but would walk round the 
place before leaving. for, i had a presentiment that i should never 
be there again, and i felt that the dying light was suited to my 
last view of it. 
by the wilderness of casks that i had walked on long ago, and on 
which the rain of years had fallen since, rotting them in many 
places, and leaving miniature swamps and pools of water upon those 
that stood on end, i made my way to the ruined garden. i went all 
round it; round by the corner where herbert and i had fought our 
battle; round by the paths where estella and i had walked. so cold, 
so lonely, so dreary all! 
taking the brewery on my way back, i raised the rusty latch of a 
little door at the garden end of it, and walked through. i was 
going out at the opposite door - not easy to open now, for the damp 
wood had started and swelled, and the hinges were yielding, and the 
threshold was encumbered with a growth of fungus - when i turned my 
head to look back. a childish association revived with wonderful 
force in the moment of the slight action, and i fancied that i saw 
miss havisham hanging to the beam. so strong was the impression, 
that i stood under the beam shuddering from head to foot before i 
knew it was a fancy - though to be sure i was there in an instant. 
the mournfulness of the place and time, and the great terror of 
this illusion, though it was but momentary, caused me to feel an 
indescribable awe as i came out between the open wooden gates where 
i had once wrung my hair after estella had wrung my heart. passing 
on into the front court-yard, i hesitated whether to call the woman 
to let me out at the locked gate of which she had the key, or first 
to go up-stairs and assure myself that miss havisham was as safe 
and well as i had left her. i took the latter course and went up. 
i looked into the room where i had left her, and i saw her seated 
in the ragged chair upon the hearth close to the fire, with her 
back towards me. in the moment when i was withdrawing my head to go 
quietly away, i saw a great flaming light spring up. in the same 
moment, i saw her running at me, shrieking, with a whirl of fire 
blazing all about her, and soaring at least as many feet above her 
head as she was high. 
i had a double-caped great-coat on, and over my arm another thick 
coat. that i got them off, closed with her, threw her down, and got 
them over her; that i dragged the great cloth from the table for 
the same purpose, and with it dragged down the heap of rottenness 
in the midst, and all the ugly things that sheltered there; that we 
were on the ground struggling like desperate enemies, and that the 
closer i covered her, the more wildly she shrieked and tried to 
free herself; that this occurred i knew through the result, but not 
through anything i felt, or thought, or knew i did. i knew nothing 
until i knew that we were on the floor by the great table, and that 
patches of tinder yet alight were floating in the smoky air, which, 
a moment ago, had been her faded bridal dress. 
then, i looked round and saw the disturbed beetles and spiders 
running away over the floor, and the servants coming in with 
breathless cries at the door. i still held her forcibly down with 
all my strength, like a prisoner who might escape; and i doubt if i 
even knew who she was, or why we had struggled, or that she had 
been in flames, or that the flames were out, until i saw the 
patches of tinder that had been her garments, no longer alight but 
falling in a black shower around us. 
she was insensible, and i was afraid to have her moved, or even 
touched. assistance was sent for and i held her until it came, as 
if i unreasonably fancied (i think i did) that if i let her go, the 
fire would break out again and consume her. when i got up, on the 
surgeon's coming to her with other aid, i was astonished to see 
that both my hands were burnt; for, i had no knowledge of it 
through the sense of feeling. 
on examination it was pronounced that she had received serious 
hurts, but that they of themselves were far from hopeless; the 
danger lay mainly in the nervous shock. by the surgeon's 
directions, her bed was carried into that room and laid upon the 
great table: which happened to be well suited to the dressing of 
her injuries. when i saw her again, an hour afterwards, she lay 
indeed where i had seen her strike her stick, and had heard her say 
that she would lie one day. 
though every vestige of her dress was burnt, as they told me, she 
still had something of her old ghastly bridal appearance; for, they 
had covered her to the throat with white cotton-wool, and as she 
lay with a white sheet loosely overlying that, the phantom air of 
something that had been and was changed, was still upon her. 
i found, on questioning the servants, that estella was in paris, 
and i got a promise from the surgeon that he would write to her by 
the next post. miss havisham's family i took upon myself; intending 
to communicate with mr. matthew pocket only, and leave him to do as 
he liked about informing the rest. this i did next day, through 
herbert, as soon as i returned to town. 
there was a stage, that evening, when she spoke collectedly of what 
had happened, though with a certain terrible vivacity. towards 
midnight she began to wander in her speech, and after that it 
gradually set in that she said innumerable times in a low solemn 
voice, "what have i done!" and then, "when she first came, i meant 
to save her from misery like mine." and then, "take the pencil and 
write under my name, 'i forgive her!'" she never changed the order 
of these three sentences, but she sometimes left out a word in one 
or other of them; never putting in another word, but always leaving 
a blank and going on to the next word. 
as i could do no service there, and as i had, nearer home, that 
pressing reason for anxiety and fear which even her wanderings 
could not drive out of my mind, i decided in the course of the 
night that i would return by the early morning coach: walking on a 
mile or so, and being taken up clear of the town. at about six 
o'clock of the morning, therefore, i leaned over her and touched 
her lips with mine, just as they said, not stopping for being 
touched, "take the pencil and write under my name, 'i forgive 
her.'" 
chapter 50 
my hands had been dressed twice or thrice in the night, and again 
in the morning. my left arm was a good deal burned to the elbow, 
and, less severely, as high as the shoulder; it was very painful, 
but the flames had set in that direction, and i felt thankful it 
was no worse. my right hand was not so badly burnt but that i could 
move the fingers. it was bandaged, of course, but much less 
inconveniently than my left hand and arm; those i carried in a 
sling; and i could only wear my coat like a cloak, loose over my 
shoulders and fastened at the neck. my hair had been caught by the 
fire, but not my head or face. 
when herbert had been down to hammersmith and seen his father, he 
came back to me at our chambers, and devoted the day to attending on 
me. he was the kindest of nurses, and at stated times took off the 
bandages, and steeped them in the cooling liquid that was kept 
ready, and put them on again, with a patient tenderness that i was 
deeply grateful for. 
at first, as i lay quiet on the sofa, i found it painfully 
difficult, i might say impossible, to get rid of the impression of 
the glare of the flames, their hurry and noise, and the fierce 
burning smell. if i dozed for a minute, i was awakened by miss 
havisham's cries, and by her running at me with all that height of 
fire above her head. this pain of the mind was much harder to 
strive against than any bodily pain i suffered; and herbert, seeing 
that, did his utmost to hold my attention engaged. 
neither of us spoke of the boat, but we both thought of it. that 
was made apparent by our avoidance of the subject, and by our 
agreeing - without agreement - to make my recovery of the use of my 
hands, a question of so many hours, not of so many weeks. 
my first question when i saw herbert had been of course, whether 
all was well down the river? as he replied in the affirmative, with 
perfect confidence and cheerfulness, we did not resume the subject 
until the day was wearing away. but then, as herbert changed the 
bandages, more by the light of the fire than by the outer light, he 
went back to it spontaneously. 
"i sat with provis last night, handel, two good hours." 
"where was clara?" 
"dear little thing!" said herbert. "she was up and down with 
gruffandgrim all the evening. he was perpetually pegging at the 
floor, the moment she left his sight. i doubt if he can hold out 
long though. what with rum and pepper - and pepper and rum - i 
should think his pegging must be nearly over." 
"and then you will be married, herbert?" 
"how can i take care of the dear child otherwise? - lay your arm 
out upon the back of the sofa, my dear boy, and i'll sit down here, 
and get the bandage off so gradually that you shall not know when 
it comes. i was speaking of provis. do you know, handel, he 
improves?" 
"i said to you i thought he was softened when i last saw him." 
"so you did. and so he is. he was very communicative last night, 
and told me more of his life. you remember his breaking off here 
about some woman that he had had great trouble with. - did i hurt 
you?" 
i had started, but not under his touch. his words had given me a 
start. 
"i had forgotten that, herbert, but i remember it now you speak of 
it." 
"well! he went into that part of his life, and a dark wild part it 
is. shall i tell you? or would it worry you just now?" 
"tell me by all means. every word." 
herbert bent forward to look at me more nearly, as if my reply had 
been rather more hurried or more eager than he could quite account 
for. "your head is cool?" he said, touching it. 
"quite," said i. "tell me what provis said, my dear herbert." 
"it seems," said herbert, " - there's a bandage off most 
charmingly, and now comes the cool one - makes you shrink at first, 
my poor dear fellow, don't it? but it will be comfortable presently 
it seems that the woman was a young woman, and a jealous woman, 
and a revengeful woman; revengeful, handel, to the last degree." 
"to what last degree?" 
"murder. - does it strike too cold on that sensitive place?" 
"i don't feel it. how did she murder? whom did she murder?" "why, 
the deed may not have merited quite so terrible a name," said 
herbert, "but, she was tried for it, and mr. jaggers defended her, 
and the reputation of that defence first made his name known to 
provis. it was another and a stronger woman who was the victim, and 
there had been a struggle - in a barn. who began it, or how fair it 
was, or how unfair, may be doubtful; but how it ended, is certainly 
not doubtful, for the victim was found throttled." 
"was the woman brought in guilty?" 
"no; she was acquitted. - my poor handel, i hurt you!" 
"it is impossible to be gentler, herbert. yes? what else?" 
"this acquitted young woman and provis had a little child: a little 
child of whom provis was exceedingly fond. on the evening of the 
very night when the object of her jealousy was strangled as i tell 
you, the young woman presented herself before provis for one 
moment, and swore that she would destroy the child (which was in 
her possession), and he should never see it again; then, she 
vanished. - there's the worst arm comfortably in the sling once 
more, and now there remains but the right hand, which is a far 
easier job. i can do it better by this light than by a stronger, 
for my hand is steadiest when i don't see the poor blistered 
patches too distinctly. - you don't think your breathing is 
affected, my dear boy? you seem to breathe quickly." 
"perhaps i do, herbert. did the woman keep her oath?" 
"there comes the darkest part of provis's life. she did." 
"that is, he says she did." 
"why, of course, my dear boy," returned herbert, in a tone of 
surprise, and again bending forward to get a nearer look at me. "he 
says it all. i have no other information." 
"no, to be sure." 
"now, whether," pursued herbert, "he had used the child's mother 
ill, or whether he had used the child's mother well, provis doesn't 
say; but, she had shared some four or five years of the wretched 
life he described to us at this fireside, and he seems to have felt 
pity for her, and forbearance towards her. therefore, fearing he 
should be called upon to depose about this destroyed child, and so 
be the cause of her death, he hid himself (much as he grieved for 
the child), kept himself dark, as he says, out of the way and out 
of the trial, and was only vaguely talked of as a certain man 
called abel, out of whom the jealousy arose. after the acquittal 
she disappeared, and thus he lost the child and the child's 
mother." 
"i want to ask-" 
"a moment, my dear boy, and i have done. that evil genius, 
compeyson, the worst of scoundrels among many scoundrels, knowing 
of his keeping out of the way at that time, and of his reasons for 
doing so, of course afterwards held the knowledge over his head as 
a means of keeping him poorer, and working him harder. it was clear 
last night that this barbed the point of provis's animosity." 
"i want to know," said i, "and particularly, herbert, whether he 
told you when this happened?" 
"particularly? let me remember, then, what he said as to that. his 
expression was, 'a round score o' year ago, and a'most directly 
after i took up wi' compeyson.' how old were you when you came upon 
him in the little churchyard?" 
"i think in my seventh year." 
"ay. it had happened some three or four years then, he said, and 
you brought into his mind the little girl so tragically lost, who 
would have been about your age." 
"herbert," said i, after a short silence, in a hurried way, "can 
you see me best by the light of the window, or the light of the 
fire?" 
"by the firelight," answered herbert, coming close again. 
"look at me." 
"i do look at you, my dear boy." 
"touch me." 
"i do touch you, my dear boy." 
"you are not afraid that i am in any fever, or that my head is much 
disordered by the accident of last night?" 
"n-no, my dear boy," said herbert, after taking time to examine me. 
"you are rather excited, but you are quite yourself." 
"i know i am quite myself. and the man we have in hiding down the 
river, is estella's father." 
chapter 51 
what purpose i had in view when i was hot on tracing out and 
proving estella's parentage, i cannot say. it will presently be 
seen that the question was not before me in a distinct shape, until 
it was put before me by a wiser head than my own. 
but, when herbert and i had held our momentous conversation, i was 
seized with a feverish conviction that i ought to hunt the matter 
down - that i ought not to let it rest, but that i ought to see mr. 
jaggers, and come at the bare truth. i really do not know whether i 
felt that i did this for estella's sake, or whether i was glad to 
transfer to the man in whose preservation i was so much concerned, 
some rays of the romantic interest that had so long surrounded her. 
perhaps the latter possibility may be the nearer to the truth. 
any way, i could scarcely be withheld from going out to 
gerrard-street that night. herbert's representations that if i did, 
i should probably be laid up and stricken useless, when our 
fugitive's safety would depend upon me, alone restrained my 
impatience. on the understanding, again and again reiterated, that 
come what would, i was to go to mr. jaggers to-morrow, i at length 
submitted to keep quiet, and to have my hurts looked after, and to 
stay at home. early next morning we went out together, and at the 
corner of giltspur-street by smithfield, i left herbert to go his 
way into the city, and took my way to little britain. 
there were periodical occasions when mr. jaggers and wemmick went 
over the office accounts, and checked off the vouchers, and put all 
things straight. on these occasions wemmick took his books and 
papers into mr. jaggers's room, and one of the up-stairs clerks came 
down into the outer office. finding such clerk on wemmick's post 
that morning, i knew what was going on; but, i was not sorry to 
have mr. jaggers and wemmick together, as wemmick would then hear 
for himself that i said nothing to compromise him. 
my appearance with my arm bandaged and my coat loose over my 
shoulders, favoured my object. although i had sent mr. jaggers a 
brief account of the accident as soon as i had arrived in town, yet 
i had to give him all the details now; and the speciality of the 
occasion caused our talk to be less dry and hard, and less strictly 
regulated by the rules of evidence, than it had been before. while 
i described the disaster, mr. jaggers stood, according to his wont, 
before the fire. wemmick leaned back in his chair, staring at me, 
with his hands in the pockets of his trousers, and his pen put 
horizontally into the post. the two brutal casts, always 
inseparable in my mind from the official proceedings, seemed to be 
congestively considering whether they didn't smell fire at the 
present moment. 
my narrative finished, and their questions exhausted, i then 
produced miss havisham's authority to receive the nine hundred 
pounds for herbert. mr. jaggers's eyes retired a little deeper into 
his head when i handed him the tablets, but he presently handed 
them over to wemmick, with instructions to draw the cheque for his 
signature. while that was in course of being done, i looked on at 
wemmick as he wrote, and mr. jaggers, poising and swaying himself on 
his well-polished boots, looked on at me. "i am sorry, pip," said 
he, as i put the cheque in my pocket, when he had signed it, "that 
we do nothing for you." 
"miss havisham was good enough to ask me," i returned, "whether she 
could do nothing for me, and i told her no." 
"everybody should know his own business," said mr. jaggers. and i 
saw wemmick's lips form the words "portable property." 
"i should not have told her no, if i had been you," said mr 
jaggers; "but every man ought to know his own business best." 
"every man's business," said wemmick, rather reproachfully towards 
me, "is portable property." 
as i thought the time was now come for pursuing the theme i had at 
heart, i said, turning on mr. jaggers: 
"i did ask something of miss havisham, however, sir. i asked her to 
give me some information relative to her adopted daughter, and she 
gave me all she possessed." 
"did she?" said mr. jaggers, bending forward to look at his boots 
and then straightening himself. "hah! i don't think i should have 
done so, if i had been miss havisham. but she ought to know her own 
business best." 
"i know more of the history of miss havisham's adopted child, than 
miss havisham herself does, sir. i know her mother." 
mr. jaggers looked at me inquiringly, and repeated "mother?" 
"i have seen her mother within these three days." 
"yes?" said mr. jaggers. 
"and so have you, sir. and you have seen her still more recently." 
"yes?" said mr. jaggers. 
"perhaps i know more of estella's history than even you do," said 
i. "i know her father too." 
a certain stop that mr. jaggers came to in his manner - he was too 
self-possessed to change his manner, but he could not help its 
being brought to an indefinably attentive stop - assured me that he 
did not know who her father was. this i had strongly suspected from 
provis's account (as herbert had repeated it) of his having kept 
himself dark; which i pieced on to the fact that he himself was not 
mr. jaggers's client until some four years later, and when he could 
have no reason for claiming his identity. but, i could not be sure 
of this unconsciousness on mr. jaggers's part before, though i was 
quite sure of it now. 
"so! you know the young lady's father, pip?" said mr. jaggers. 
"yes," i replied, "and his name is provis - from new south wales." 
even mr. jaggers started when i said those words. it was the 
slightest start that could escape a man, the most carefully 
repressed and the soonest checked, but he did start, though he made 
it a part of the action of taking out his pocket-handkerchief. how 
wemmick received the announcement i am unable to say, for i was 
afraid to look at him just then, lest mr. jaggers's sharpness should 
detect that there had been some communication unknown to him 
between us. 
"and on what evidence, pip," asked mr. jaggers, very coolly, as he 
paused with his handkerchief half way to his nose, "does provis 
make this claim?" 
"he does not make it," said i, "and has never made it, and has no 
knowledge or belief that his daughter is in existence." 
for once, the powerful pocket-handkerchief failed. my reply was so 
unexpected that mr. jaggers put the handkerchief back into his 
pocket without completing the usual performance, folded his arms, 
and looked with stern attention at me, though with an immovable 
face. 
then i told him all i knew, and how i knew it; with the one 
reservation that i left him to infer that i knew from miss havisham 
what i in fact knew from wemmick. i was very careful indeed as to 
that. nor, did i look towards wemmick until i had finished all i 
had to tell, and had been for some time silently meeting mr. 
jaggers's look. when i did at last turn my eyes in wemmick's 
direction, i found that he had unposted his pen, and was intent 
upon the table before him. 
"hah!" said mr. jaggers at last, as he moved towards the papers on 
the table, " - what item was it you were at, wemmick, when mr. pip 
came in?" 
but i could not submit to be thrown off in that way, and i made a 
passionate, almost an indignant, appeal to him to be more frank and 
manly with me. i reminded him of the false hopes into which i had 
lapsed, the length of time they had lasted, and the discovery i had 
made: and i hinted at the danger that weighed upon my spirits. i 
represented myself as being surely worthy of some little confidence 
from him, in return for the confidence i had just now imparted. i 
said that i did not blame him, or suspect him, or mistrust him, but 
i wanted assurance of the truth from him. and if he asked me why i 
wanted it and why i thought i had any right to it, i would tell 
him, little as he cared for such poor dreams, that i had loved 
estella dearly and long, and that, although i had lost her and must 
live a bereaved life, whatever concerned her was still nearer and 
dearer to me than anything else in the world. and seeing that mr. 
jaggers stood quite still and silent, and apparently quite 
obdurate, under this appeal, i turned to wemmick, and said, 
"wemmick, i know you to be a man with a gentle heart. i have seen 
your pleasant home, and your old father, and all the innocent 
cheerful playful ways with which you refresh your business life. 
and i entreat you to say a word for me to mr. jaggers, and to 
represent to him that, all circumstances considered, he ought to be 
more open with me!" 
i have never seen two men look more oddly at one another than mr. 
jaggers and wemmick did after this apostrophe. at first, a 
misgiving crossed me that wemmick would be instantly dismissed from 
his employment; but, it melted as i saw mr. jaggers relax into 
something like a smile, and wemmick become bolder. 
"what's all this?" said mr. jaggers. "you with an old father, and 
you with pleasant and playful ways?" 
"well!" returned wemmick. "if i don't bring 'em here, what does it 
matter?" 
"pip," said mr. jaggers, laying his hand upon my arm, and smiling 
openly, "this man must be the most cunning impostor in all london." 
"not a bit of it," returned wemmick, growing bolder and bolder. "i 
think you're another." 
again they exchanged their former odd looks, each apparently still 
distrustful that the other was taking him in. 
"you with a pleasant home?" said mr. jaggers. 
"since it don't interfere with business," returned wemmick, "let it 
be so. now, i look at you, sir, i shouldn't wonder if you might be 
planning and contriving to have a pleasant home of your own, one of 
these days, when you're tired of all this work." 
mr. jaggers nodded his head retrospectively two or three times, and 
actually drew a sigh. "pip," said he, "we won't talk about 'poor 
dreams;' you know more about such things than i, having much 
fresher experience of that kind. but now, about this other matter. 
i'll put a case to you. mind! i admit nothing." 
he waited for me to declare that i quite understood that he 
expressly said that he admitted nothing. 
"now, pip," said mr. jaggers, "put this case. put the case that a 
woman, under such circumstances as you have mentioned, held her 
child concealed, and was obliged to communicate the fact to her 
legal adviser, on his representing to her that he must know, with 
an eye to the latitude of his defence, how the fact stood about 
that child. put the case that at the same time he held a trust to 
find a child for an eccentric rich lady to adopt and bring up." 
"i follow you, sir." 
"put the case that he lived in an atmosphere of evil, and that all 
he saw of children, was, their being generated in great numbers for 
certain destruction. put the case that he often saw children 
solemnly tried at a criminal bar, where they were held up to be 
seen; put the case that he habitually knew of their being 
imprisoned, whipped, transported, neglected, cast out, qualified in 
all ways for the hangman, and growing up to be hanged. put the case 
that pretty nigh all the children he saw in his daily business 
life, he had reason to look upon as so much spawn, to develop into 
the fish that were to come to his net - to be prosecuted, defended, 
forsworn, made orphans, bedevilled somehow." 
"i follow you, sir." 
"put the case, pip, that here was one pretty little child out of 
the heap, who could be saved; whom the father believed dead, and 
dared make no stir about; as to whom, over the mother, the legal 
adviser had this power: "i know what you did, and how you did it. 
you came so and so, this was your manner of attack and this the 
manner of resistance, you went so and so, you did such and such 
things to divert suspicion. i have tracked you through it all, and 
i tell it you all. part with the child, unless it should be 
necessary to produce it to clear you, and then it shall be 
produced. give the child into my hands, and i will do my best to 
bring you off. if you are saved, your child is saved too; if you 
are lost, your child is still saved." put the case that this was 
done, and that the woman was cleared." 
"i understand you perfectly." 
"but that i make no admissions?" 
"that you make no admissions." and wemmick repeated, "no 
admissions." 
"put the case, pip, that passion and the terror of death had a 
little shaken the woman's intellect, and that when she was set at 
liberty, she was scared out of the ways of the world and went to 
him to be sheltered. put the case that he took her in, and that he 
kept down the old wild violent nature whenever he saw an inkling of 
its breaking out, by asserting his power over her in the old way. 
do you comprehend the imaginary case?" 
"quite." 
"put the case that the child grew up, and was married for money. 
that the mother was still living. that the father was still living. 
that the mother and father unknown to one another, were dwelling 
within so many miles, furlongs, yards if you like, of one another. 
that the secret was still a secret, except that you had got wind of 
it. put that last case to yourself very carefully." 
"i do." 
"i ask wemmick to put it to himself very carefully." 
and wemmick said, "i do." 
"for whose sake would you reveal the secret? for the father's? i 
think he would not be much the better for the mother. for the 
mother's? i think if she had done such a deed she would be safer 
where she was. for the daughter's? i think it would hardly serve 
her, to establish her parentage for the information of her husband, 
and to drag her back to disgrace, after an escape of twenty years, 
pretty secure to last for life. but, add the case that you had 
loved her, pip, and had made her the subject of those 'poor dreams' 
which have, at one time or another, been in the heads of more men 
than you think likely, then i tell you that you had better - and 
would much sooner when you had thought well of it - chop off that 
bandaged left hand of yours with your bandaged right hand, and then 
pass the chopper on to wemmick there, to cut that off, too." 
i looked at wemmick, whose face was very grave. he gravely touched 
his lips with his forefinger. i did the same. mr. jaggers did the 
same. "now, wemmick," said the latter then, resuming his usual 
manner, "what item was it you were at, when mr. pip came in?" 
standing by for a little, while they were at work, i observed that 
the odd looks they had cast at one another were repeated several 
times: with this difference now, that each of them seemed 
suspicious, not to say conscious, of having shown himself in a weak 
and unprofessional light to the other. for this reason, i suppose, 
they were now inflexible with one another; mr. jaggers being highly 
dictatorial, and wemmick obstinately justifying himself whenever 
there was the smallest point in abeyance for a moment. i had never 
seen them on such ill terms; for generally they got on very well 
indeed together. 
but, they were both happily relieved by the opportune appearance of 
mike, the client with the fur cap and the habit of wiping his nose 
on his sleeve, whom i had seen on the very first day of my 
appearance within those walls. this individual, who, either in his 
own person or in that of some member of his family, seemed to be 
always in trouble (which in that place meant newgate), called to 
announce that his eldest daughter was taken up on suspicion of 
shop-lifting. as he imparted this melancholy circumstance to 
wemmick, mr. jaggers standing magisterially before the fire and 
taking no share in the proceedings, mike's eye happened to twinkle 
with a tear. 
"what are you about?" demanded wemmick, with the utmost 
indignation. "what do you come snivelling here for?" 
"i didn't go to do it, mr. wemmick." 
"you did," said wemmick. "how dare you? you're not in a fit state 
to come here, if you can't come here without spluttering like a bad 
pen. what do you mean by it?" 
"a man can't help his feelings, mr. wemmick," pleaded mike. 
"his what?" demanded wemmick, quite savagely. "say that again!" 
"now, look here my man," said mr. jaggers, advancing a step, and 
pointing to the door. "get out of this office. i'll have no 
feelings here. get out." 
"it serves you right," said wemmick, "get out." 
so the unfortunate mike very humbly withdrew, and mr. jaggers and 
wemmick appeared to have re-established their good understanding, 
and went to work again with an air of refreshment upon them as if 
they had just had lunch. 
chapter 52 
from little britain, i went, with my cheque in my pocket, to miss 
skiffins's brother, the accountant; and miss skiffins's brother, 
the accountant, going straight to clarriker's and bringing 
clarriker to me, i had the great satisfaction of concluding that 
arrangement. it was the only good thing i had done, and the only 
completed thing i had done, since i was first apprised of my great 
expectations. 
clarriker informing me on that occasion that the affairs of the 
house were steadily progressing, that he would now be able to 
establish a small branch-house in the east which was much wanted 
for the extension of the business, and that herbert in his new 
partnership capacity would go out and take charge of it, i found 
that i must have prepared for a separation from my friend, even 
though my own affairs had been more settled. and now indeed i felt 
as if my last anchor were loosening its hold, and i should soon be 
driving with the winds and waves. 
but, there was recompense in the joy with which herbert would come 
home of a night and tell me of these changes, little imagining that 
he told me no news, and would sketch airy pictures of himself 
conducting clara barley to the land of the arabian nights, and of 
me going out to join them (with a caravan of camels, i believe), 
and of our all going up the nile and seeing wonders. without being 
sanguine as to my own part in these bright plans, i felt that 
herbert's way was clearing fast, and that old bill barley had but 
to stick to his pepper and rum, and his daughter would soon be 
happily provided for. 
we had now got into the month of march. my left arm, though it 
presented no bad symptoms, took in the natural course so long to 
heal that i was still unable to get a coat on. my right arm was 
tolerably restored; - disfigured, but fairly serviceable. 
on a monday morning, when herbert and i were at breakfast, i 
received the following letter from wemmick by the post. 
"walworth. burn this as soon as read. early in the week, or say 
wednesday, you might do what you know of, if you felt disposed to 
try it. now burn." 
when i had shown this to herbert and had put it in the fire - but 
not before we had both got it by heart - we considered what to do. 
for, of course my being disabled could now be no longer kept out of 
view. 
"i have thought it over, again and again," said herbert, "and i 
think i know a better course than taking a thames waterman. take 
startop. a good fellow, a skilled hand, fond of us, and 
enthusiastic and honourable." 
i had thought of him, more than once. 
"but how much would you tell him, herbert?" 
"it is necessary to tell him very little. let him suppose it a mere 
freak, but a secret one, until the morning comes: then let him know 
that there is urgent reason for your getting provis aboard and 
away. you go with him?" 
"no doubt." 
"where?" 
it had seemed to me, in the many anxious considerations i had given 
the point, almost indifferent what port we made for - hamburg, 
rotterdam, antwerp - the place signified little, so that he was got 
out of england. any foreign steamer that fell in our way and would 
take us up, would do. i had always proposed to myself to get him 
well down the river in the boat; certainly well beyond gravesend, 
which was a critical place for search or inquiry if suspicion were 
afoot. as foreign steamers would leave london at about the time of 
high-water, our plan would be to get down the river by a previous 
ebb-tide, and lie by in some quiet spot until we could pull off to 
one. the time when one would be due where we lay, wherever that 
might be, could be calculated pretty nearly, if we made inquiries 
beforehand. 
herbert assented to all this, and we went out immediately after 
breakfast to pursue our investigations. we found that a steamer for 
hamburg was likely to suit our purpose best, and we directed our 
thoughts chiefly to that vessel. but we noted down what other 
foreign steamers would leave london with the same tide, and we 
satisfied ourselves that we knew the build and colour of each. we 
then separated for a few hours; i, to get at once such passports as 
were necessary; herbert, to see startop at his lodgings. we both 
did what we had to do without any hindrance, and when we met again 
at one o'clock reported it done. i, for my part, was prepared with 
passports; herbert had seen startop, and he was more than ready to 
join. 
those two should pull a pair of oars, we settled, and i would 
steer; our charge would be sitter, and keep quiet; as speed was not 
our object, we should make way enough. we arranged that herbert 
should not come home to dinner before going to mill pond bank that 
evening; that he should not go there at all, to-morrow evening, 
tuesday; that he should prepare provis to come down to some stairs 
hard by the house, on wednesday, when he saw us approach, and not 
sooner; that all the arrangements with him should be concluded that 
monday night; and that he should be communicated with no more in 
any way, until we took him on board. 
these precautions well understood by both of us, i went home. 
on opening the outer door of our chambers with my key, i found a 
letter in the box, directed to me; a very dirty letter, though not 
ill-written. it had been delivered by hand (of course since i left 
home), and its contents were these: 
"if you are not afraid to come to the old marshes to-night or 
tomorrow night at nine, and to come to the little sluice-house by 
the limekiln, you had better come. if you want information 
regarding your uncle provis, you had much better come and tell no 
one and lose no time. you must come alone. bring this with you." 
i had had load enough upon my mind before the receipt of this 
strange letter. what to do now, i could not tell. and the worst 
was, that i must decide quickly, or i should miss the afternoon 
coach, which would take me down in time for to-night. to-morrow 
night i could not think of going, for it would be too close upon 
the time of the flight. and again, for anything i knew, the 
proffered information might have some important bearing on the 
flight itself. 
if i had had ample time for consideration, i believe i should still 
have gone. having hardly any time for consideration - my watch 
showing me that the coach started within half an hour - i resolved 
to go. i should certainly not have gone, but for the reference to 
my uncle provis; that, coming on wemmick's letter and the morning's 
busy preparation, turned the scale. 
it is so difficult to become clearly possessed of the contents of 
almost any letter, in a violent hurry, that i had to read this 
mysterious epistle again, twice, before its injunction to me to be 
secret got mechanically into my mind. yielding to it in the same 
mechanical kind of way, i left a note in pencil for herbert, 
telling him that as i should be so soon going away, i knew not for 
how long, i had decided to hurry down and back, to ascertain for 
myself how miss havisham was faring. i had then barely time to get 
my great-coat, lock up the chambers, and make for the coach-office 
by the short by-ways. if i had taken a hackney-chariot and gone by 
the streets, i should have missed my aim; going as i did, i caught 
the coach just as it came out of the yard. i was the only inside 
passenger, jolting away knee-deep in straw, when i came to myself. 
for, i really had not been myself since the receipt of the letter; 
it had so bewildered me ensuing on the hurry of the morning. the 
morning hurry and flutter had been great, for, long and anxiously 
as i had waited for wemmick, his hint had come like a surprise at 
last. and now, i began to wonder at myself for being in the coach, 
and to doubt whether i had sufficient reason for being there, and 
to consider whether i should get out presently and go back, and to 
argue against ever heeding an anonymous communication, and, in 
short, to pass through all those phases of contradiction and 
indecision to which i suppose very few hurried people are 
strangers. still, the reference to provis by name, mastered 
everything. i reasoned as i had reasoned already without knowing it 
if that be reasoning - in case any harm should befall him through 
my not going, how could i ever forgive myself! 
it was dark before we got down, and the journey seemed long and 
dreary to me who could see little of it inside, and who could not 
go outside in my disabled state. avoiding the blue boar, i put up 
at an inn of minor reputation down the town, and ordered some 
dinner. while it was preparing, i went to satis house and inquired 
for miss havisham; she was still very ill, though considered 
something better. 
my inn had once been a part of an ancient ecclesiastical house, and 
i dined in a little octagonal common-room, like a font. as i was 
not able to cut my dinner, the old landlord with a shining bald 
head did it for me. this bringing us into conversation, he was so 
good as to entertain me with my own story - of course with the 
popular feature that pumblechook was my earliest benefactor and the 
founder of my fortunes. 
"do you know the young man?" said i. 
"know him!" repeated the landlord. "ever since he was - no height 
at all." 
"does he ever come back to this neighbourhood?" 
"ay, he comes back," said the landlord, "to his great friends, now 
and again, and gives the cold shoulder to the man that made him." 
"what man is that?" 
"him that i speak of," said the landlord. "mr. pumblechook." 
"is he ungrateful to no one else?" 
"no doubt he would be, if he could," returned the landlord, "but he 
can't. and why? because pumblechook done everything for him." 
"does pumblechook say so?" 
"say so!" replied the landlord. "he han't no call to say so." 
"but does he say so?" 
"it would turn a man's blood to white wine winegar to hear him tell 
of it, sir," said the landlord. 
i thought, "yet joe, dear joe, you never tell of it. long-suffering 
and loving joe, you never complain. nor you, sweet-tempered biddy!" 
"your appetite's been touched like, by your accident," said the 
landlord, glancing at the bandaged arm under my coat. "try a 
tenderer bit." 
"no thank you," i replied, turning from the table to brood over the 
fire. "i can eat no more. please take it away." 
i had never been struck at so keenly, for my thanklessness to joe, 
as through the brazen impostor pumblechook. the falser he, the 
truer joe; the meaner he, the nobler joe. 
my heart was deeply and most deservedly humbled as i mused over the 
fire for an hour or more. the striking of the clock aroused me, but 
not from my dejection or remorse, and i got up and had my coat 
fastened round my neck, and went out. i had previously sought in my 
pockets for the letter, that i might refer to it again, but i could 
not find it, and was uneasy to think that it must have been dropped 
in the straw of the coach. i knew very well, however, that the 
appointed place was the little sluice-house by the limekiln on the 
marshes, and the hour nine. towards the marshes i now went 
straight, having no time to spare. 
chapter 53 
it was a dark night, though the full moon rose as i left the 
enclosed lands, and passed out upon the marshes. beyond their dark 
line there was a ribbon of clear sky, hardly broad enough to hold 
the red large moon. in a few minutes she had ascended out of that 
clear field, in among the piled mountains of cloud. 
there was a melancholy wind, and the marshes were very dismal. a 
stranger would have found them insupportable, and even to me they 
were so oppressive that i hesitated, half inclined to go back. but, 
i knew them well, and could have found my way on a far darker 
night, and had no excuse for returning, being there. so, having 
come there against my inclination, i went on against it. 
the direction that i took, was not that in which my old home lay, 
nor that in which we had pursued the convicts. my back was turned 
towards the distant hulks as i walked on, and, though i could see 
the old lights away on the spits of sand, i saw them over my 
shoulder. i knew the limekiln as well as i knew the old battery, 
but they were miles apart; so that if a light had been burning at 
each point that night, there would have been a long strip of the 
blank horizon between the two bright specks. 
at first, i had to shut some gates after me, and now and then to 
stand still while the cattle that were lying in the banked-up 
pathway, arose and blundered down among the grass and reeds. but 
after a little while, i seemed to have the whole flats to myself. 
it was another half-hour before i drew near to the kiln. the lime 
was burning with a sluggish stifling smell, but the fires were made 
up and left, and no workmen were visible. hard by, was a small 
stone-quarry. it lay directly in my way, and had been worked that 
day, as i saw by the tools and barrows that were lying about. 
coming up again to the marsh level out of this excavation - for the 
rude path lay through it - i saw a light in the old sluice-house. i 
quickened my pace, and knocked at the door with my hand. waiting 
for some reply, i looked about me, noticing how the sluice was 
abandoned and broken, and how the house - of wood with a tiled roof 
would not be proof against the weather much longer, if it were so 
even now, and how the mud and ooze were coated with lime, and how 
the choking vapour of the kiln crept in a ghostly way towards me. 
still there was no answer, and i knocked again. no answer still, 
and i tried the latch. 
it rose under my hand, and the door yielded. looking in, i saw a 
lighted candle on a table, a bench, and a mattress on a truckle 
bedstead. as there was a loft above, i called, "is there any one 
here?" but no voice answered. then, i looked at my watch, and, 
finding that it was past nine, called again, "is there any one 
here?" there being still no answer, i went out at the door, 
irresolute what to do. 
it was beginning to rain fast. seeing nothing save what i had seen 
already, i turned back into the house, and stood just within the 
shelter of the doorway, looking out into the night. while i was 
considering that some one must have been there lately and must soon 
be coming back, or the candle would not be burning, it came into my 
head to look if the wick were long. i turned round to do so, and 
had taken up the candle in my hand, when it was extinguished by 
some violent shock, and the next thing i comprehended, was, that i 
had been caught in a strong running noose, thrown over my head from 
behind. 
"now," said a suppressed voice with an oath, "i've got you!" 
"what is this?" i cried, struggling. "who is it? help, help, help!" 
not only were my arms pulled close to my sides, but the pressure on 
my bad arm caused me exquisite pain. sometimes, a strong man's 
hand, sometimes a strong man's breast, was set against my mouth to 
deaden my cries, and with a hot breath always close to me, i 
struggled ineffectually in the dark, while i was fastened tight to 
the wall. "and now," said the suppressed voice with another oath, 
"call out again, and i'll make short work of you!" 
faint and sick with the pain of my injured arm, bewildered by the 
surprise, and yet conscious how easily this threat could be put in 
execution, i desisted, and tried to ease my arm were it ever so 
little. but, it was bound too tight for that. i felt as if, having 
been burnt before, it were now being boiled. 
the sudden exclusion of the night and the substitution of black 
darkness in its place, warned me that the man had closed a shutter. 
after groping about for a little, he found the flint and steel he 
wanted, and began to strike a light. i strained my sight upon the 
sparks that fell among the tinder, and upon which he breathed and 
breathed, match in hand, but i could only see his lips, and the 
blue point of the match; even those, but fitfully. the tinder was 
damp - no wonder there - and one after another the sparks died out. 
the man was in no hurry, and struck again with the flint and steel. 
as the sparks fell thick and bright about him, i could see his 
hands, and touches of his face, and could make out that he was 
seated and bending over the table; but nothing more. presently i 
saw his blue lips again, breathing on the tinder, and then a flare 
of light flashed up, and showed me orlick. 
whom i had looked for, i don't know. i had not looked for him. 
seeing him, i felt that i was in a dangerous strait indeed, and i 
kept my eyes upon him. 
he lighted the candle from the flaring match with great 
deliberation, and dropped the match, and trod it out. then, he put 
the candle away from him on the table, so that he could see me, and 
sat with his arms folded on the table and looked at me. i made out 
that i was fastened to a stout perpendicular ladder a few inches 
from the wall - a fixture there - the means of ascent to the loft 
above. 
"now," said he, when we had surveyed one another for some time, 
"i've got you." 
"unbind me. let me go!" 
"ah!" he returned, "i'll let you go. i'll let you go to the moon, 
i'll let you go to the stars. all in good time." 
"why have you lured me here?" 
"don't you know?" said he, with a deadly look 
"why have you set upon me in the dark?" 
"because i mean to do it all myself. one keeps a secret better than 
two. oh you enemy, you enemy!" 
his enjoyment of the spectacle i furnished, as he sat with his arms 
folded on the table, shaking his head at me and hugging himself, 
had a malignity in it that made me tremble. as i watched him in 
silence, he put his hand into the corner at his side, and took up a 
gun with a brass-bound stock. 
"do you know this?" said he, making as if he would take aim at me. 
"do you know where you saw it afore? speak, wolf!" 
"yes," i answered. 
"you cost me that place. you did. speak!" 
"what else could i do?" 
"you did that, and that would be enough, without more. how dared 
you to come betwixt me and a young woman i liked?" 
"when did i?" 
"when didn't you? it was you as always give old orlick a bad name 
to her." 
"you gave it to yourself; you gained it for yourself. i could have 
done you no harm, if you had done yourself none." 
"you're a liar. and you'll take any pains, and spend any money, to 
drive me out of this country, will you?" said he, repeating my 
words to biddy in the last interview i had with her. "now, i'll 
tell you a piece of information. it was never so well worth your 
while to get me out of this country as it is to-night. ah! if it 
was all your money twenty times told, to the last brass farden!" as 
he shook his heavy hand at me, with his mouth snarling like a 
tiger's, i felt that it was true. 
"what are you going to do to me?" 
"i'm a-going," said he, bringing his fist down upon the table with a 
heavy blow, and rising as the blow fell, to give it greater force, 
"i'm a-going to have your life!" 
he leaned forward staring at me, slowly unclenched his hand and 
drew it across his mouth as if his mouth watered for me, and sat 
down again. 
"you was always in old orlick's way since ever you was a child. you 
goes out of his way, this present night. he'll have no more on you. 
you're dead." 
i felt that i had come to the brink of my grave. for a moment i 
looked wildly round my trap for any chance of escape; but there was 
none. 
"more than that," said he, folding his arms on the table again, "i 
won't have a rag of you, i won't have a bone of you, left on earth. 
i'll put your body in the kiln - i'd carry two such to it, on my 
shoulders - and, let people suppose what they may of you, they 
shall never know nothing." 
my mind, with inconceivable rapidity, followed out all the 
consequences of such a death. estella's father would believe i had 
deserted him, would be taken, would die accusing me; even herbert 
would doubt me, when he compared the letter i had left for him, 
with the fact that i had called at miss havisham's gate for only a 
moment; joe and biddy would never know how sorry i had been that 
night; none would ever know what i had suffered, how true i had 
meant to be, what an agony i had passed through. the death close 
before me was terrible, but far more terrible than death was the 
dread of being misremembered after death. and so quick were my 
thoughts, that i saw myself despised by unborn generations - 
estella's children, and their children - while the wretch's words 
were yet on his lips. 
"now, wolf," said he, "afore i kill you like any other beast - 
which is wot i mean to do and wot i have tied you up for - i'll 
have a good look at you and a good goad at you. oh, you enemy!" 
it had passed through my thoughts to cry out for help again; though 
few could know better than i, the solitary nature of the spot, and 
the hopelessness of aid. but as he sat gloating over me, i was 
supported by a scornful detestation of him that sealed my lips. 
above all things, i resolved that i would not entreat him, and that 
i would die making some last poor resistance to him. softened as my 
thoughts of all the rest of men were in that dire extremity; humbly 
beseeching pardon, as i did, of heaven; melted at heart, as i was, 
by the thought that i had taken no farewell, and never never now 
could take farewell, of those who were dear to me, or could explain 
myself to them, or ask for their compassion on my miserable errors; 
still, if i could have killed him, even in dying, i would have done 
it. 
he had been drinking, and his eyes were red and bloodshot. around 
his neck was slung a tin bottle, as i had often seen his meat and 
drink slung about him in other days. he brought the bottle to his 
lips, and took a fiery drink from it; and i smelt the strong 
spirits that i saw flash into his face. 
"wolf!" said he, folding his arms again, "old orlick's a-going to 
tell you somethink. it was you as did for your shrew sister." 
again my mind, with its former inconceivable rapidity, had 
exhausted the whole subject of the attack upon my sister, her 
illness, and her death, before his slow and hesitating speech had 
formed these words. 
"it was you, villain," said i. 
"i tell you it was your doing - i tell you it was done through 
you," he retorted, catching up the gun, and making a blow with the 
stock at the vacant air between us. "i come upon her from behind, 
as i come upon you to-night. i giv' it her! i left her for dead, 
and if there had been a limekiln as nigh her as there is now nigh 
you, she shouldn't have come to life again. but it warn't old 
orlick as did it; it was you. you was favoured, and he was bullied 
and beat. old orlick bullied and beat, eh? now you pays for it. you 
done it; now you pays for it." 
he drank again, and became more ferocious. i saw by his tilting of 
the bottle that there was no great quantity left in it. i 
distinctly understood that he was working himself up with its 
contents, to make an end of me. i knew that every drop it held, was 
a drop of my life. i knew that when i was changed into a part of 
the vapour that had crept towards me but a little while before, 
like my own warning ghost, he would do as he had done in my 
sister's case - make all haste to the town, and be seen slouching 
about there, drinking at the ale-houses. my rapid mind pursued him 
to the town, made a picture of the street with him in it, and 
contrasted its lights and life with the lonely marsh and the white 
vapour creeping over it, into which i should have dissolved. 
it was not only that i could have summed up years and years and 
years while he said a dozen words, but that what he did say 
presented pictures to me, and not mere words. in the excited and 
exalted state of my brain, i could not think of a place without 
seeing it, or of persons without seeing them. it is impossible to 
over-state the vividness of these images, and yet i was so intent, 
all the time, upon him himself - who would not be intent on the 
tiger crouching to spring! - that i knew of the slightest action of 
his fingers. 
when he had drunk this second time, he rose from the bench on which 
he sat, and pushed the table aside. then, he took up the candle, 
and shading it with his murderous hand so as to throw its light on 
me, stood before me, looking at me and enjoying the sight. 
"wolf, i'll tell you something more. it was old orlick as you 
tumbled over on your stairs that night." 
i saw the staircase with its extinguished lamps. i saw the shadows 
of the heavy stair-rails, thrown by the watchman's lantern on the 
wall. i saw the rooms that i was never to see again; here, a door 
half open; there, a door closed; all the articles of furniture 
around. 
"and why was old orlick there? i'll tell you something more, wolf. 
you and her have pretty well hunted me out of this country, so far 
as getting a easy living in it goes, and i've took up with new 
companions, and new masters. some of 'em writes my letters when i 
wants 'em wrote - do you mind? - writes my letters, wolf! they 
writes fifty hands; they're not like sneaking you, as writes but 
one. i've had a firm mind and a firm will to have your life, since 
you was down here at your sister's burying. i han't seen a way to 
get you safe, and i've looked arter you to know your ins and outs. 
for, says old orlick to himself, 'somehow or another i'll have 
him!' what! when i looks for you, i finds your uncle provis, eh?" 
mill pond bank, and chinks's basin, and the old green copper 
rope-walk, all so clear and plain! provis in his rooms, the signal 
whose use was over, pretty clara, the good motherly woman, old bill 
barley on his back, all drifting by, as on the swift stream of my 
life fast running out to sea! 
"you with a uncle too! why, i know'd you at gargery's when you was 
so small a wolf that i could have took your weazen betwixt this 
finger and thumb and chucked you away dead (as i'd thoughts o' 
doing, odd times, when i see you loitering amongst the pollards on 
a sunday), and you hadn't found no uncles then. no, not you! but 
when old orlick come for to hear that your uncle provis had 
mostlike wore the leg-iron wot old orlick had picked up, filed 
asunder, on these meshes ever so many year ago, and wot he kep by 
him till he dropped your sister with it, like a bullock, as he 
means to drop you - hey? - when he come for to hear that - hey?-" 
in his savage taunting, he flared the candle so close at me, that i 
turned my face aside, to save it from the flame. 
"ah!" he cried, laughing, after doing it again, "the burnt child 
dreads the fire! old orlick knowed you was burnt, old orlick knowed 
you was smuggling your uncle provis away, old orlick's a match for 
you and know'd you'd come to-night! now i'll tell you something 
more, wolf, and this ends it. there's them that's as good a match 
for your uncle provis as old orlick has been for you. let him 'ware 
them, when he's lost his nevvy! let him 'ware them, when no man 
can't find a rag of his dear relation's clothes, nor yet a bone of 
his body. there's them that can't and that won't have magwitch - 
yes, i know the name! - alive in the same land with them, and 
that's had such sure information of him when he was alive in 
another land, as that he couldn't and shouldn't leave it unbeknown 
and put them in danger. p'raps it's them that writes fifty hands, 
and that's not like sneaking you as writes but one. 'ware 
compeyson, magwitch, and the gallows!" 
he flared the candle at me again, smoking my face and hair, and for 
an instant blinding me, and turned his powerful back as he replaced 
the light on the table. i had thought a prayer, and had been with 
joe and biddy and herbert, before he turned towards me again. 
there was a clear space of a few feet between the table and the 
opposite wall. within this space, he now slouched backwards and 
forwards. his great strength seemed to sit stronger upon him than 
ever before, as he did this with his hands hanging loose and heavy 
at his sides, and with his eyes scowling at me. i had no grain of 
hope left. wild as my inward hurry was, and wonderful the force of 
the pictures that rushed by me instead of thoughts, i could yet 
clearly understand that unless he had resolved that i was within a 
few moments of surely perishing out of all human knowledge, he 
would never have told me what he had told. 
of a sudden, he stopped, took the cork out of his bottle, and 
tossed it away. light as it was, i heard it fall like a plummet. he 
swallowed slowly, tilting up the bottle by little and little, and 
now he looked at me no more. the last few drops of liquor he poured 
into the palm of his hand, and licked up. then, with a sudden hurry 
of violence and swearing horribly, he threw the bottle from him, 
and stooped; and i saw in his hand a stone-hammer with a long heavy 
handle. 
the resolution i had made did not desert me, for, without uttering 
one vain word of appeal to him, i shouted out with all my might, 
and struggled with all my might. it was only my head and my legs 
that i could move, but to that extent i struggled with all the 
force, until then unknown, that was within me. in the same instant 
i heard responsive shouts, saw figures and a gleam of light dash in 
at the door, heard voices and tumult, and saw orlick emerge from a 
struggle of men, as if it were tumbling water, clear the table at a 
leap, and fly out into the night. 
after a blank, i found that i was lying unbound, on the floor, in 
the same place, with my head on some one's knee. my eyes were fixed 
on the ladder against the wall, when i came to myself - had opened 
on it before my mind saw it - and thus as i recovered 
consciousness, i knew that i was in the place where i had lost it. 
too indifferent at first, even to look round and ascertain who 
supported me, i was lying looking at the ladder, when there came 
between me and it, a face. the face of trabb's boy! 
"i think he's all right!" said trabb's boy, in a sober voice; "but 
ain't he just pale though!" 
at these words, the face of him who supported me looked over into 
mine, and i saw my supporter to be- 
"herbert! great heaven!" 
"softly," said herbert. "gently, handel. don't be too eager." 
"and our old comrade, startop!" i cried, as he too bent over me. 
"remember what he is going to assist us in," said herbert, "and be 
calm." 
the allusion made me spring up; though i dropped again from the 
pain in my arm. "the time has not gone by, herbert, has it? what 
night is to-night? how long have i been here?" for, i had a strange 
and strong misgiving that i had been lying there a long time - a 
day and a night - two days and nights - more. 
"the time has not gone by. it is still monday night." 
"thank god!" 
"and you have all to-morrow, tuesday, to rest in," said herbert. 
"but you can't help groaning, my dear handel. what hurt have you 
got? can you stand?" 
"yes, yes," said i, "i can walk. i have no hurt but in this 
throbbing arm." 
they laid it bare, and did what they could. it was violently 
swollen and inflamed, and i could scarcely endure to have it 
touched. but, they tore up their handkerchiefs to make fresh 
bandages, and carefully replaced it in the sling, until we could 
get to the town and obtain some cooling lotion to put upon it. in a 
little while we had shut the door of the dark and empty 
sluice-house, and were passing through the quarry on our way back. 
trabb's boy - trabb's overgrown young man now - went before us with 
a lantern, which was the light i had seen come in at the door. but, 
the moon was a good two hours higher than when i had last seen the 
sky, and the night though rainy was much lighter. the white vapour 
of the kiln was passing from us as we went by, and, as i had 
thought a prayer before, i thought a thanksgiving now. 
entreating herbert to tell me how he had come to my rescue - which 
at first he had flatly refused to do, but had insisted on my 
remaining quiet - i learnt that i had in my hurry dropped the 
letter, open, in our chambers, where he, coming home to bring with 
him startop whom he had met in the street on his way to me, found 
it, very soon after i was gone. its tone made him uneasy, and the 
more so because of the inconsistency between it and the hasty 
letter i had left for him. his uneasiness increasing instead of 
subsiding after a quarter of an hour's consideration, he set off 
for the coach-office, with startop, who volunteered his company, to 
make inquiry when the next coach went down. finding that the 
afternoon coach was gone, and finding that his uneasiness grew into 
positive alarm, as obstacles came in his way, he resolved to follow 
in a post-chaise. so, he and startop arrived at the blue boar, 
fully expecting there to find me, or tidings of me; but, finding 
neither, went on to miss havisham's, where they lost me. hereupon 
they went back to the hotel (doubtless at about the time when i was 
hearing the popular local version of my own story), to refresh 
themselves and to get some one to guide them out upon the marshes. 
among the loungers under the boar's archway, happened to be trabb's 
boy - true to his ancient habit of happening to be everywhere where 
he had no business - and trabb's boy had seen me passing from miss 
havisham's in the direction of my dining-place. thus, trabb's boy 
became their guide, and with him they went out to the sluice-house: 
though by the town way to the marshes, which i had avoided. now, as 
they went along, herbert reflected, that i might, after all, have 
been brought there on some genuine and serviceable errand tending 
to provis's safety, and, bethinking himself that in that case 
interruption must be mischievous, left his guide and startop on the 
edge of the quarry, and went on by himself, and stole round the 
house two or three times, endeavouring to ascertain whether all was 
right within. as he could hear nothing but indistinct sounds of one 
deep rough voice (this was while my mind was so busy), he even at 
last began to doubt whether i was there, when suddenly i cried out 
loudly, and he answered the cries, and rushed in, closely followed 
by the other two. 
when i told herbert what had passed within the house, he was for 
our immediately going before a magistrate in the town, late at 
night as it was, and getting out a warrant. but, i had already 
considered that such a course, by detaining us there, or binding us 
to come back, might be fatal to provis. there was no gainsaying 
this difficulty, and we relinquished all thoughts of pursuing 
orlick at that time. for the present, under the circumstances, we 
deemed it prudent to make rather light of the matter to trabb's 
boy; who i am convinced would have been much affected by 
disappointment, if he had known that his intervention saved me from 
the limekiln. not that trabb's boy was of a malignant nature, but 
that he had too much spare vivacity, and that it was in his 
constitution to want variety and excitement at anybody's expense. 
when we parted, i presented him with two guineas (which seemed to 
meet his views), and told him that i was sorry ever to have had an 
ill opinion of him (which made no impression on him at all). 
wednesday being so close upon us, we determined to go back to 
london that night, three in the post-chaise; the rather, as we 
should then be clear away, before the night's adventure began to be 
talked of. herbert got a large bottle of stuff for my arm, and by 
dint of having this stuff dropped over it all the night through, i 
was just able to bear its pain on the journey. it was daylight when 
we reached the temple, and i went at once to bed, and lay in bed 
all day. 
my terror, as i lay there, of falling ill and being unfitted for 
tomorrow, was so besetting, that i wonder it did not disable me of 
itself. it would have done so, pretty surely, in conjunction with 
the mental wear and tear i had suffered, but for the unnatural 
strain upon me that to-morrow was. so anxiously looked forward to, 
charged with such consequences, its results so impenetrably hidden 
though so near. 
no precaution could have been more obvious than our refraining from 
communication with him that day; yet this again increased my 
restlessness. i started at every footstep and every sound, 
believing that he was discovered and taken, and this was the 
messenger to tell me so. i persuaded myself that i knew he was 
taken; that there was something more upon my mind than a fear or a 
presentiment; that the fact had occurred, and i had a mysterious 
knowledge of it. as the day wore on and no ill news came, as the 
day closed in and darkness fell, my overshadowing dread of being 
disabled by illness before to-morrow morning, altogether mastered 
me. my burning arm throbbed, and my burning head throbbed, and i 
fancied i was beginning to wander. i counted up to high numbers, to 
make sure of myself, and repeated passages that i knew in prose and 
verse. it happened sometimes that in the mere escape of a fatigued 
mind, i dozed for some moments or forgot; then i would say to 
myself with a start, "now it has come, and i am turning delirious!" 
they kept me very quiet all day, and kept my arm constantly 
dressed, and gave me cooling drinks. whenever i fell asleep, i 
awoke with the notion i had had in the sluice-house, that a long 
time had elapsed and the opportunity to save him was gone. about 
midnight i got out of bed and went to herbert, with the conviction 
that i had been asleep for four-and-twenty hours, and that 
wednesday was past. it was the last self-exhausting effort of my 
fretfulness, for, after that, i slept soundly. 
wednesday morning was dawning when i looked out of window. the 
winking lights upon the bridges were already pale, the coming sun 
was like a marsh of fire on the horizon. the river, still dark and 
mysterious, was spanned by bridges that were turning coldly grey, 
with here and there at top a warm touch from the burning in the 
sky. as i looked along the clustered roofs, with church towers and 
spires shooting into the unusually clear air, the sun rose up, and 
a veil seemed to be drawn from the river, and millions of sparkles 
burst out upon its waters. from me too, a veil seemed to be drawn, 
and i felt strong and well. 
herbert lay asleep in his bed, and our old fellow-student lay 
asleep on the sofa. i could not dress myself without help, but i 
made up the fire, which was still burning, and got some coffee 
ready for them. in good time they too started up strong and well, 
and we admitted the sharp morning air at the windows, and looked at 
the tide that was still flowing towards us. 
"when it turns at nine o'clock," said herbert, cheerfully, "look 
out for us, and stand ready, you over there at mill pond bank!" 
chapter 54 
it was one of those march days when the sun shines hot and the wind 
blows cold: when it is summer in the light, and winter in the 
shade. we had out pea-coats with us, and i took a bag. of all my 
worldly possessions i took no more than the few necessaries that 
filled the bag. where i might go, what i might do, or when i might 
return, were questions utterly unknown to me; nor did i vex my mind 
with them, for it was wholly set on provis's safety. i only 
wondered for the passing moment, as i stopped at the door and 
looked back, under what altered circumstances i should next see 
those rooms, if ever. 
we loitered down to the temple stairs, and stood loitering there, 
as if we were not quite decided to go upon the water at all. of 
course i had taken care that the boat should be ready and 
everything in order. after a little show of indecision, which there 
were none to see but the two or three amphibious creatures 
belonging to our temple stairs, we went on board and cast off; 
herbert in the bow, i steering. it was then about high-water - 
half-past eight. 
our plan was this. the tide, beginning to run down at nine, and 
being with us until three, we intended still to creep on after it 
had turned, and row against it until dark. we should then be well 
in those long reaches below gravesend, between kent and essex, 
where the river is broad and solitary, where the waterside 
inhabitants are very few, and where lone public-houses are 
scattered here and there, of which we could choose one for a 
resting-place. there, we meant to lie by, all night. the steamer 
for hamburg, and the steamer for rotterdam, would start from london 
at about nine on thursday morning. we should know at what time to 
expect them, according to where we were, and would hail the first; 
so that if by any accident we were not taken abroad, we should have 
another chance. we knew the distinguishing marks of each vessel. 
the relief of being at last engaged in the execution of the 
purpose, was so great to me that i felt it difficult to realize the 
condition in which i had been a few hours before. the crisp air, 
the sunlight, the movement on the river, and the moving river 
itself - the road that ran with us, seeming to sympathize with us, 
animate us, and encourage us on - freshened me with new hope. i 
felt mortified to be of so little use in the boat; but, there were 
few better oarsmen than my two friends, and they rowed with a 
steady stroke that was to last all day. 
at that time, the steam-traffic on the thames was far below its 
present extent, and watermen's boats were far more numerous. of 
barges, sailing colliers, and coasting traders, there were perhaps 
as many as now; but, of steam-ships, great and small, not a tithe 
or a twentieth part so many. early as it was, there were plenty of 
scullers going here and there that morning, and plenty of barges 
dropping down with the tide; the navigation of the river between 
bridges, in an open boat, was a much easier and commoner matter in 
those days than it is in these; and we went ahead among many skiffs 
and wherries, briskly. 
old london bridge was soon passed, and old billingsgate market with 
its oyster-boats and dutchmen, and the white tower and traitor's 
gate, and we were in among the tiers of shipping. here, were the 
leith, aberdeen, and glasgow steamers, loading and unloading goods, 
and looking immensely high out of the water as we passed alongside; 
here, were colliers by the score and score, with the coal-whippers 
plunging off stages on deck, as counterweights to measures of coal 
swinging up, which were then rattled over the side into barges; 
here, at her moorings was to-morrow's steamer for rotterdam, of 
which we took good notice; and here to-morrow's for hamburg, under 
whose bowsprit we crossed. and now i, sitting in the stern, could 
see with a faster beating heart, mill pond bank and mill pond 
stairs. 
"is he there?" said herbert. 
"not yet." 
"right! he was not to come down till he saw us. can you see his 
signal?" 
"not well from here; but i think i see it. - now, i see him! pull 
both. easy, herbert. oars!" 
we touched the stairs lightly for a single moment, and he was on 
board and we were off again. he had a boat-cloak with him, and a 
black canvas bag, and he looked as like a river-pilot as my heart 
could have wished. "dear boy!" he said, putting his arm on my 
shoulder as he took his seat. "faithful dear boy, well done. 
thankye, thankye!" 
again among the tiers of shipping, in and out, avoiding rusty 
chain-cables frayed hempen hawsers and bobbing buoys, sinking for 
the moment floating broken baskets, scattering floating chips of 
wood and shaving, cleaving floating scum of coal, in and out, under 
the figure-head of the john of sunderland making a speech to the 
winds (as is done by many johns), and the betsy of yarmouth with a 
firm formality of bosom and her nobby eyes starting two inches out 
of her head, in and out, hammers going in shipbuilders'yards, saws 
going at timber, clashing engines going at things unknown, pumps 
going in leaky ships, capstans going, ships going out to sea, and 
unintelligible sea-creatures roaring curses over the bulwarks at 
respondent lightermen, in and out - out at last upon the clearer 
river, where the ships' boys might take their fenders in, no longer 
fishing in troubled waters with them over the side, and where the 
festooned sails might fly out to the wind. 
at the stairs where we had taken him abroad, and ever since, i had 
looked warily for any token of our being suspected. i had seen 
none. we certainly had not been, and at that time as certainly we 
were not, either attended or followed by any boat. if we had been 
waited on by any boat, i should have run in to shore, and have 
obliged her to go on, or to make her purpose evident. but, we held 
our own, without any appearance of molestation. 
he had his boat-cloak on him, and looked, as i have said, a natural 
part of the scene. it was remarkable (but perhaps the wretched life 
he had led, accounted for it), that he was the least anxious of any 
of us. he was not indifferent, for he told me that he hoped to live 
to see his gentleman one of the best of gentlemen in a foreign 
country; he was not disposed to be passive or resigned, as i 
understood it; but he had no notion of meeting danger half way. 
when it came upon him, he confronted it, but it must come before he 
troubled himself. 
"if you knowed, dear boy," he said to me, "what it is to sit here 
alonger my dear boy and have my smoke, arter having been day by day 
betwixt four walls, you'd envy me. but you don't know what it is." 
"i think i know the delights of freedom," i answered. 
"ah," said he, shaking his head gravely. "but you don't know it 
equal to me. you must have been under lock and key, dear boy, to 
know it equal to me - but i ain't a-going to be low." 
it occurred to me as inconsistent, that for any mastering idea, he 
should have endangered his freedom and even his life. but i 
reflected that perhaps freedom without danger was too much apart 
from all the habit of his existence to be to him what it would be 
to another man. i was not far out, since he said, after smoking a 
little: 
"you see, dear boy, when i was over yonder, t'other side the world, 
i was always a-looking to this side; and it come flat to be there, 
for all i was a-growing rich. everybody knowed magwitch, and 
magwitch could come, and magwitch could go, and nobody's head would 
be troubled about him. they ain't so easy concerning me here, dear 
boy - wouldn't be, leastwise, if they knowed where i was." 
"if all goes well," said i, "you will be perfectly free and safe 
again, within a few hours." 
"well," he returned, drawing a long breath, "i hope so." 
"and think so?" 
he dipped his hand in the water over the boat's gunwale, and said, 
smiling with that softened air upon him which was not new to me: 
"ay, i s'pose i think so, dear boy. we'd be puzzled to be more 
quiet and easy-going than we are at present. but - it's a-flowing 
so soft and pleasant through the water, p'raps, as makes me think 
it - i was a-thinking through my smoke just then, that we can no 
more see to the bottom of the next few hours, than we can see to 
the bottom of this river what i catches hold of. nor yet we can't 
no more hold their tide than i can hold this. and it's run through 
my fingers and gone, you see!" holding up his dripping hand. 
"but for your face, i should think you were a little despondent," 
said i. 
"not a bit on it, dear boy! it comes of flowing on so quiet, and of 
that there rippling at the boat's head making a sort of a sunday 
tune. maybe i'm a-growing a trifle old besides." 
he put his pipe back in his mouth with an undisturbed expression of 
face, and sat as composed and contented as if we were already out 
of england. yet he was as submissive to a word of advice as if he 
had been in constant terror, for, when we ran ashore to get some 
bottles of beer into the boat, and he was stepping out, i hinted 
that i thought he would be safest where he was, and he said. "do 
you, dear boy?" and quietly sat down again. 
the air felt cold upon the river, but it was a bright day, and the 
sunshine was very cheering. the tide ran strong, i took care to 
lose none of it, and our steady stroke carried us on thoroughly 
well. by imperceptible degrees, as the tide ran out, we lost more 
and more of the nearer woods and hills, and dropped lower and lower 
between the muddy banks, but the tide was yet with us when we were 
off gravesend. as our charge was wrapped in his cloak, i purposely 
passed within a boat or two's length of the floating custom house, 
and so out to catch the stream, alongside of two emigrant ships, 
and under the bows of a large transport with troops on the 
forecastle looking down at us. and soon the tide began to slacken, 
and the craft lying at anchor to swing, and presently they had all 
swung round, and the ships that were taking advantage of the new 
tide to get up to the pool, began to crowd upon us in a fleet, and 
we kept under the shore, as much out of the strength of the tide 
now as we could, standing carefully off from low shallows and 
mudbanks. 
our oarsmen were so fresh, by dint of having occasionally let her 
drive with the tide for a minute or two, that a quarter of an 
hour's rest proved full as much as they wanted. we got ashore among 
some slippery stones while we ate and drank what we had with us, 
and looked about. it was like my own marsh country, flat and 
monotonous, and with a dim horizon; while the winding river turned 
and turned, and the great floating buoys upon it turned and turned, 
and everything else seemed stranded and still. for, now, the last 
of the fleet of ships was round the last low point we had headed; 
and the last green barge, straw-laden, with a brown sail, had 
followed; and some ballast-lighters, shaped like a child's first 
rude imitation of a boat, lay low in the mud; and a little squat 
shoal-lighthouse on open piles, stood crippled in the mud on stilts 
and crutches; and slimy stakes stuck out of the mud, and slimy 
stones stuck out of the mud, and red landmarks and tidemarks stuck 
out of the mud, and an old landing-stage and an old roofless building 
slipped into the mud, and all about us was stagnation and mud. 
we pushed off again, and made what way we could. it was much harder 
work now, but herbert and startop persevered, and rowed, and rowed, 
and rowed, until the sun went down. by that time the river had 
lifted us a little, so that we could see above the bank. there was 
the red sun, on the low level of the shore, in a purple haze, fast 
deepening into black; and there was the solitary flat marsh; and 
far away there were the rising grounds, between which and us there 
seemed to be no life, save here and there in the foreground a 
melancholy gull. 
as the night was fast falling, and as the moon, being past the 
full, would not rise early, we held a little council: a short one, 
for clearly our course was to lie by at the first lonely tavern we 
could find. so, they plied their oars once more, and i looked out 
for anything like a house. thus we held on, speaking little, for 
four or five dull miles. it was very cold, and, a collier coming by 
us, with her galley-fire smoking and flaring, looked like a 
comfortable home. the night was as dark by this time as it would be 
until morning; and what light we had, seemed to come more from the 
river than the sky, as the oars in their dipping struck at a few 
reflected stars. 
at this dismal time we were evidently all possessed by the idea that 
we were followed. as the tide made, it flapped heavily at irregular 
intervals against the shore; and whenever such a sound came, one or 
other of us was sure to start and look in that direction. here and 
there, the set of the current had worn down the bank into a little 
creek, and we were all suspicious of such places, and eyed them 
nervously. sometimes, "what was that ripple?" one of us would say 
in a low voice. or another, "is that a boat yonder?" and 
afterwards, we would fall into a dead silence, and i would sit 
impatiently thinking with what an unusual amount of noise the oars 
worked in the thowels. 
at length we descried a light and a roof, and presently afterwards 
ran alongside a little causeway made of stones that had been picked 
up hard by. leaving the rest in the boat, i stepped ashore, and 
found the light to be in a window of a public-house. it was a dirty 
place enough, and i dare say not unknown to smuggling adventurers; 
but there was a good fire in the kitchen, and there were eggs and 
bacon to eat, and various liquors to drink. also, there were two 
double-bedded rooms - "such as they were," the landlord said. no 
other company was in the house than the landlord, his wife, and a 
grizzled male creature, the "jack" of the little causeway, who was 
as slimy and smeary as if he had been low-water mark too. 
with this assistant, i went down to the boat again, and we all came 
ashore, and brought out the oars, and rudder, and boat-hook, and 
all else, and hauled her up for the night. we made a very good meal 
by the kitchen fire, and then apportioned the bedrooms: herbert and 
startop were to occupy one; i and our charge the other. we found 
the air as carefully excluded from both, as if air were fatal to 
life; and there were more dirty clothes and bandboxes under the 
beds than i should have thought the family possessed. but, we 
considered ourselves well off, notwithstanding, for a more solitary 
place we could not have found. 
while we were comforting ourselves by the fire after our meal, the 
jack - who was sitting in a corner, and who had a bloated pair of 
shoes on, which he had exhibited while we were eating our eggs and 
bacon, as interesting relics that he had taken a few days ago from 
the feet of a drowned seaman washed ashore - asked me if we had 
seen a four-oared galley going up with the tide? when i told him 
no, he said she must have gone down then, and yet she "took up 
too," when she left there. 
"they must ha' thought better on't for some reason or another," 
said the jack, "and gone down." 
"a four-oared galley, did you say?" said i. 
"a four," said the jack, "and two sitters." 
"did they come ashore here?" 
"they put in with a stone two-gallon jar, for some beer. i'd 
ha'been glad to pison the beer myself," said the jack, "or put some 
rattling physic in it." 
"why?" 
"i know why," said the jack. he spoke in a slushy voice, as if much 
mud had washed into his throat. 
"he thinks," said the landlord: a weakly meditative man with a pale 
eye, who seemed to rely greatly on his jack: "he thinks they was, 
what they wasn't." 
"i knows what i thinks," observed the jack. 
"you thinks custum 'us, jack?" said the landlord. 
"i do," said the jack. 
"then you're wrong, jack." 
"am i!" 
in the infinite meaning of his reply and his boundless confidence 
in his views, the jack took one of his bloated shoes off, looked 
into it, knocked a few stones out of it on the kitchen floor, and 
put it on again. he did this with the air of a jack who was so 
right that he could afford to do anything. 
"why, what do you make out that they done with their buttons then, 
jack?" asked the landlord, vacillating weakly. 
"done with their buttons?" returned the jack. "chucked 'em 
overboard. swallered 'em. sowed 'em, to come up small salad. done 
with their buttons!" 
"don't be cheeky, jack," remonstrated the landlord, in a melancholy 
and pathetic way. 
"a custum 'us officer knows what to do with his buttons," said the 
jack, repeating the obnoxious word with the greatest contempt, 
"when they comes betwixt him and his own light. a four and two 
sitters don't go hanging and hovering, up with one tide and down 
with another, and both with and against another, without there 
being custum 'us at the bottom of it." saying which he went out in 
disdain; and the landlord, having no one to reply upon, found it 
impracticable to pursue the subject. 
this dialogue made us all uneasy, and me very uneasy. the dismal 
wind was muttering round the house, the tide was flapping at the 
shore, and i had a feeling that we were caged and threatened. a 
four-oared galley hovering about in so unusual a way as to attract 
this notice, was an ugly circumstance that i could not get rid of. 
when i had induced provis to go up to bed, i went outside with my 
two companions (startop by this time knew the state of the case), 
and held another council. whether we should remain at the house 
until near the steamer's time, which would be about one in the 
afternoon; or whether we should put off early in the morning; was 
the question we discussed. on the whole we deemed it the better 
course to lie where we were, until within an hour or so of the 
steamer's time, and then to get out in her track, and drift easily 
with the tide. having settled to do this, we returned into the 
house and went to bed. 
i lay down with the greater part of my clothes on, and slept well 
for a few hours. when i awoke, the wind had risen, and the sign of 
the house (the ship) was creaking and banging about, with noises 
that startled me. rising softly, for my charge lay fast asleep, i 
looked out of the window. it commanded the causeway where we had 
hauled up our boat, and, as my eyes adapted themselves to the light 
of the clouded moon, i saw two men looking into her. they passed by 
under the window, looking at nothing else, and they did not go down 
to the landing-place which i could discern to be empty, but struck 
across the marsh in the direction of the nore. 
my first impulse was to call up herbert, and show him the two men 
going away. but, reflecting before i got into his room, which was 
at the back of the house and adjoined mine, that he and startop had 
had a harder day than i, and were fatigued, i forbore. going back 
to my window, i could see the two men moving over the marsh. in 
that light, however, i soon lost them, and feeling very cold, lay 
down to think of the matter, and fell asleep again. 
we were up early. as we walked to and fro, all four together, 
before breakfast, i deemed it right to recount what i had seen. 
again our charge was the least anxious of the party. it was very 
likely that the men belonged to the custom house, he said quietly, 
and that they had no thought of us. i tried to persuade myself that 
it was so - as, indeed, it might easily be. however, i proposed 
that he and i should walk away together to a distant point we could 
see, and that the boat should take us aboard there, or as near 
there as might prove feasible, at about noon. this being considered 
a good precaution, soon after breakfast he and i set forth, without 
saying anything at the tavern. 
he smoked his pipe as we went along, and sometimes stopped to clap 
me on the shoulder. one would have supposed that it was i who was 
in danger, not he, and that he was reassuring me. we spoke very 
little. as we approached the point, i begged him to remain in a 
sheltered place, while i went on to reconnoitre; for, it was 
towards it that the men had passed in the night. he complied, and i 
went on alone. there was no boat off the point, nor any boat drawn 
up anywhere near it, nor were there any signs of the men having 
embarked there. but, to be sure the tide was high, and there might 
have been some footprints under water. 
when he looked out from his shelter in the distance, and saw that i 
waved my hat to him to come up, he rejoined me, and there we 
waited; sometimes lying on the bank wrapped in our coats, and 
sometimes moving about to warm ourselves: until we saw our boat 
coming round. we got aboard easily, and rowed out into the track of 
the steamer. by that time it wanted but ten minutes of one o'clock, 
and we began to look out for her smoke. 
but, it was half-past one before we saw her smoke, and soon 
afterwards we saw behind it the smoke of another steamer. as they 
were coming on at full speed, we got the two bags ready, and took 
that opportunity of saying good-bye to herbert and startop. we had 
all shaken hands cordially, and neither herbert's eyes nor mine 
were quite dry, when i saw a four-oared galley shoot out from under 
the bank but a little way ahead of us, and row out into the same 
track. 
a stretch of shore had been as yet between us and the steamer's 
smoke, by reason of the bend and wind of the river; but now she was 
visible, coming head on. i called to herbert and startop to keep 
before the tide, that she might see us lying by for her, and i 
adjured provis to sit quite still, wrapped in his cloak. he 
answered cheerily, "trust to me, dear boy," and sat like a statue. 
meantime the galley, which was very skilfully handled, had crossed 
us, let us come up with her, and fallen alongside. leaving just 
room enough for the play of the oars, she kept alongside, drifting 
when we drifted, and pulling a stroke or two when we pulled. of the 
two sitters one held the rudder lines, and looked at us attentively 
as did all the rowers; the other sitter was wrapped up, much as 
provis was, and seemed to shrink, and whisper some instruction to 
the steerer as he looked at us. not a word was spoken in either 
boat. 
startop could make out, after a few minutes, which steamer was 
first, and gave me the word "hamburg," in a low voice as we sat 
face to face. she was nearing us very fast, and the beating of her 
peddles grew louder and louder. i felt as if her shadow were 
absolutely upon us, when the galley hailed us. i answered. 
"you have a returned transport there," said the man who held the 
lines. "that's the man, wrapped in the cloak. his name is abel 
magwitch, otherwise provis. i apprehend that man, and call upon him 
to surrender, and you to assist." 
at the same moment, without giving any audible direction to his 
crew, he ran the galley abroad of us. they had pulled one sudden 
stroke ahead, had got their oars in, had run athwart us, and were 
holding on to our gunwale, before we knew what they were doing. 
this caused great confusion on board the steamer, and i heard them 
calling to us, and heard the order given to stop the paddles, and 
heard them stop, but felt her driving down upon us irresistibly. in 
the same moment, i saw the steersman of the galley lay his hand on 
his prisoner's shoulder, and saw that both boats were swinging 
round with the force of the tide, and saw that all hands on board 
the steamer were running forward quite frantically. still in the 
same moment, i saw the prisoner start up, lean across his captor, 
and pull the cloak from the neck of the shrinking sitter in the 
galley. still in the same moment, i saw that the face disclosed, 
was the face of the other convict of long ago. still in the same 
moment, i saw the face tilt backward with a white terror on it that 
i shall never forget, and heard a great cry on board the steamer 
and a loud splash in the water, and felt the boat sink from under 
me. 
it was but for an instant that i seemed to struggle with a thousand 
mill-weirs and a thousand flashes of light; that instant past, i 
was taken on board the galley. herbert was there, and startop was 
there; but our boat was gone, and the two convicts were gone. 
what with the cries aboard the steamer, and the furious blowing off 
of her steam, and her driving on, and our driving on, i could not 
at first distinguish sky from water or shore from shore; but, the 
crew of the galley righted her with great speed, and, pulling 
certain swift strong strokes ahead, lay upon their oars, every man 
looking silently and eagerly at the water astern. presently a dark 
object was seen in it, bearing towards us on the tide. no man 
spoke, but the steersman held up his hand, and all softly backed 
water, and kept the boat straight and true before it. as it came 
nearer, i saw it to be magwitch, swimming, but not swimming freely. 
he was taken on board, and instantly manacled at the wrists and 
ankles. 
the galley was kept steady, and the silent eager look-out at the 
water was resumed. but, the rotterdam steamer now came up, and 
apparently not understanding what had happened, came on at speed. 
by the time she had been hailed and stopped, both steamers were 
drifting away from us, and we were rising and falling in a troubled 
wake of water. the look-out was kept, long after all was still 
again and the two steamers were gone; but, everybody knew that it 
was hopeless now. 
at length we gave it up, and pulled under the shore towards the 
tavern we had lately left, where we were received with no little 
surprise. here, i was able to get some comforts for magwitch - 
provis no longer - who had received some very severe injury in the 
chest and a deep cut in the head. 
he told me that he believed himself to have gone under the keel of 
the steamer, and to have been struck on the head in rising. the 
injury to his chest (which rendered his breathing extremely 
painful) he thought he had received against the side of the galley. 
he added that he did not pretend to say what he might or might not 
have done to compeyson, but, that in the moment of his laying his 
hand on his cloak to identify him, that villain had staggered up 
and staggered back, and they had both gone overboard together; when 
the sudden wrenching of him (magwitch) out of our boat, and the 
endeavour of his captor to keep him in it, had capsized us. he told 
me in a whisper that they had gone down, fiercely locked in each 
other's arms, and that there had been a struggle under water, and 
that he had disengaged himself, struck out, and swum away. 
i never had any reason to doubt the exact truth of what he thus 
told me. the officer who steered the galley gave the same account 
of their going overboard. 
when i asked this officer's permission to change the prisoner's wet 
clothes by purchasing any spare garments i could get at the 
public-house, he gave it readily: merely observing that he must 
take charge of everything his prisoner had about him. so the 
pocketbook which had once been in my hands, passed into the 
officer's. he further gave me leave to accompany the prisoner to 
london; but, declined to accord that grace to my two friends. 
the jack at the ship was instructed where the drowned man had gone 
down, and undertook to search for the body in the places where it 
was likeliest to come ashore. his interest in its recovery seemed 
to me to be much heightened when he heard that it had stockings on. 
probably, it took about a dozen drowned men to fit him out 
completely; and that may have been the reason why the different 
articles of his dress were in various stages of decay. 
we remained at the public-house until the tide turned, and then 
magwitch was carried down to the galley and put on board. herbert 
and startop were to get to london by land, as soon as they could. 
we had a doleful parting, and when i took my place by magwitch's 
side, i felt that that was my place henceforth while he lived. 
for now, my repugnance to him had all melted away, and in the 
hunted wounded shackled creature who held my hand in his, i only 
saw a man who had meant to be my benefactor, and who had felt 
affectionately, gratefully, and generously, towards me with great 
constancy through a series of years. i only saw in him a much 
better man than i had been to joe. 
his breathing became more difficult and painful as the night drew 
on, and often he could not repress a groan. i tried to rest him on 
the arm i could use, in any easy position; but, it was dreadful to 
think that i could not be sorry at heart for his being badly hurt, 
since it was unquestionably best that he should die. that there 
were, still living, people enough who were able and willing to 
identify him, i could not doubt. that he would be leniently 
treated, i could not hope. he who had been presented in the worst 
light at his trial, who had since broken prison and had been tried 
again, who had returned from transportation under a life sentence, 
and who had occasioned the death of the man who was the cause of 
his arrest. 
as we returned towards the setting sun we had yesterday left behind 
us, and as the stream of our hopes seemed all running back, i told 
him how grieved i was to think that he had come home for my sake. 
"dear boy," he answered, "i'm quite content to take my chance. i've 
seen my boy, and he can be a gentleman without me." 
no. i had thought about that, while we had been there side by side. 
no. apart from any inclinations of my own, i understood wemmick's 
hint now. i foresaw that, being convicted, his possessions would be 
forfeited to the crown. 
"lookee here, dear boy," said he "it's best as a gentleman should 
not be knowed to belong to me now. only come to see me as if you 
come by chance alonger wemmick. sit where i can see you when i am 
swore to, for the last o' many times, and i don't ask no more." 
"i will never stir from your side," said i, "when i am suffered to 
be near you. please god, i will be as true to you, as you have been 
to me!" 
i felt his hand tremble as it held mine, and he turned his face 
away as he lay in the bottom of the boat, and i heard that old 
sound in his throat - softened now, like all the rest of him. it 
was a good thing that he had touched this point, for it put into my 
mind what i might not otherwise have thought of until too late: 
that he need never know how his hopes of enriching me had perished. 
chapter 55 
he was taken to the police court next day, and would have been 
immediately committed for trial, but that it was necessary to send 
down for an old officer of the prison-ship from which he had once 
escaped, to speak to his identity. nobody doubted it; but, 
compeyson, who had meant to depose to it, was tumbling on the 
tides, dead, and it happened that there was not at that time any 
prison officer in london who could give the required evidence. i 
had gone direct to mr. jaggers at his private house, on my arrival 
over night, to retain his assistance, and mr. jaggers on the 
prisoner's behalf would admit nothing. it was the sole resource, 
for he told me that the case must be over in five minutes when the 
witness was there, and that no power on earth could prevent its 
going against us. 
i imparted to mr. jaggers my design of keeping him in ignorance of 
the fate of his wealth. mr. jaggers was querulous and angry with me 
for having "let it slip through my fingers," and said we must 
memorialize by-and-by, and try at all events for some of it. but, 
he did not conceal from me that although there might be many cases 
in which the forfeiture would not be exacted, there were no 
circumstances in this case to make it one of them. i understood 
that, very well. i was not related to the outlaw, or connected with 
him by any recognizable tie; he had put his hand to no writing or 
settlement in my favour before his apprehension, and to do so now 
would be idle. i had no claim, and i finally resolved, and ever 
afterwards abided by the resolution, that my heart should never be 
sickened with the hopeless task of attempting to establish one. 
there appeared to be reason for supposing that the drowned informer 
had hoped for a reward out of this forfeiture, and had obtained 
some accurate knowledge of magwitch's affairs. when his body was 
found, many miles from the scene of his death, and so horribly 
disfigured that he was only recognizable by the contents of his 
pockets, notes were still legible, folded in a case he carried. 
among these, were the name of a banking-house in new south wales 
where a sum of money was, and the designation of certain lands of 
considerable value. both these heads of information were in a list 
that magwitch, while in prison, gave to mr. jaggers, of the 
possessions he supposed i should inherit. his ignorance, poor 
fellow, at last served him; he never mistrusted but that my 
inheritance was quite safe, with mr. jaggers's aid. 
after three days' delay, during which the crown prosecution stood 
over for the production of the witness from the prison-ship, the 
witness came, and completed the easy case. he was committed to take 
his trial at the next sessions, which would come on in a month. 
it was at this dark time of my life that herbert returned home one 
evening, a good deal cast down, and said: 
"my dear handel, i fear i shall soon have to leave you." 
his partner having prepared me for that, i was less surprised than 
he thought. 
"we shall lose a fine opportunity if i put off going to cairo, and 
i am very much afraid i must go, handel, when you most need me." 
"herbert, i shall always need you, because i shall always love you; 
but my need is no greater now, than at another time." 
"you will be so lonely." 
"i have not leisure to think of that," said i. "you know that i am 
always with him to the full extent of the time allowed, and that i 
should be with him all day long, if i could. and when i come away 
from him, you know that my thoughts are with him." 
the dreadful condition to which he was brought, was so appalling to 
both of us, that we could not refer to it in plainer words. 
"my dear fellow," said herbert, "let the near prospect of our 
separation - for, it is very near - be my justification for 
troubling you about yourself. have you thought of your future?" 
"no, for i have been afraid to think of any future." 
"but yours cannot be dismissed; indeed, my dear dear handel, it 
must not be dismissed. i wish you would enter on it now, as far as 
a few friendly words go, with me." 
"i will," said i. 
"in this branch house of ours, handel, we must have a-" 
i saw that his delicacy was avoiding the right word, so i said, "a 
clerk." 
"a clerk. and i hope it is not at all unlikely that he may expand 
(as a clerk of your acquaintance has expanded) into a partner. now, 
handel - in short, my dear boy, will you come to me?" 
there was something charmingly cordial and engaging in the manner 
in which after saying "now, handel," as if it were the grave 
beginning of a portentous business exordium, he had suddenly given 
up that tone, stretched out his honest hand, and spoken like a 
schoolboy. 
"clara and i have talked about it again and again," herbert 
pursued, "and the dear little thing begged me only this evening, 
with tears in her eyes, to say to you that if you will live with us 
when we come together, she will do her best to make you happy, and 
to convince her husband's friend that he is her friend too. we 
should get on so well, handel!" 
i thanked her heartily, and i thanked him heartily, but said i 
could not yet make sure of joining him as he so kindly offered. 
firstly, my mind was too preoccupied to be able to take in the 
subject clearly. secondly - yes! secondly, there was a vague 
something lingering in my thoughts that will come out very near the 
end of this slight narrative. 
"but if you thought, herbert, that you could, without doing any 
injury to your business, leave the question open for a little 
while-" 
"for any while," cried herbert. "six months, a year!" 
"not so long as that," said i. "two or three months at most." 
herbert was highly delighted when we shook hands on this 
arrangement, and said he could now take courage to tell me that he 
believed he must go away at the end of the week. 
"and clara?" said i. 
"the dear little thing," returned herbert, "holds dutifully to her 
father as long as he lasts; but he won't last long. mrs. whimple 
confides to me that he is certainly going." 
"not to say an unfeeling thing," said i, "he cannot do better than 
go." 
"i am afraid that must be admitted," said herbert: "and then i 
shall come back for the dear little thing, and the dear little 
thing and i will walk quietly into the nearest church. remember! 
the blessed darling comes of no family, my dear handel, and never 
looked into the red book, and hasn't a notion about her grandpapa. 
what a fortune for the son of my mother!" 
on the saturday in that same week, i took my leave of herbert - 
full of bright hope, but sad and sorry to leave me - as he sat on 
one of the seaport mail coaches. i went into a coffee-house to 
write a little note to clara, telling her he had gone off, sending 
his love to her over and over again, and then went to my lonely 
home - if it deserved the name, for it was now no home to me, and i 
had no home anywhere. 
on the stairs i encountered wemmick, who was coming down, after an 
unsuccessful application of his knuckles to my door. i had not seen 
him alone, since the disastrous issue of the attempted flight; and 
he had come, in his private and personal capacity, to say a few 
words of explanation in reference to that failure. 
"the late compeyson," said wemmick, "had by little and little got 
at the bottom of half of the regular business now transacted, and 
it was from the talk of some of his people in trouble (some of his 
people being always in trouble) that i heard what i did. i kept my 
ears open, seeming to have them shut, until i heard that he was 
absent, and i thought that would be the best time for making the 
attempt. i can only suppose now, that it was a part of his policy, 
as a very clever man, habitually to deceive his own instruments. 
you don't blame me, i hope, mr. pip? i am sure i tried to serve you, 
with all my heart." 
"i am as sure of that, wemmick, as you can be, and i thank you most 
earnestly for all your interest and friendship." 
"thank you, thank you very much. it's a bad job," said wemmick, 
scratching his head, "and i assure you i haven't been so cut up for 
a long time. what i look at, is the sacrifice of so much portable 
property. dear me!" 
"what i think of, wemmick, is the poor owner of the property." 
"yes, to be sure," said wemmick. "of course there can be no 
objection to your being sorry for him, and i'd put down a 
five-pound note myself to get him out of it. but what i look at, is 
this. the late compeyson having been beforehand with him in 
intelligence of his return, and being so determined to bring him to 
book, i do not think he could have been saved. whereas, the 
portable property certainly could have been saved. that's the 
difference between the property and the owner, don't you see?" 
i invited wemmick to come up-stairs, and refresh himself with a 
glass of grog before walking to walworth. he accepted the 
invitation. while he was drinking his moderate allowance, he said, 
with nothing to lead up to it, and after having appeared rather 
fidgety: 
"what do you think of my meaning to take a holiday on monday, mr. 
pip?" 
"why, i suppose you have not done such a thing these twelve 
months." 
"these twelve years, more likely," said wemmick. "yes. i'm going to 
take a holiday. more than that; i'm going to take a walk. more than 
that; i'm going to ask you to take a walk with me." 
i was about to excuse myself, as being but a bad companion just 
then, when wemmick anticipated me. 
"i know your engagements," said he, "and i know you are out of 
sorts, mr. pip. but if you could oblige me, i should take it as a 
kindness. it ain't a long walk, and it's an early one. say it might 
occupy you (including breakfast on the walk) from eight to twelve. 
couldn't you stretch a point and manage it?" 
he had done so much for me at various times, that this was very 
little to do for him. i said i could manage it - would manage it - 
and he was so very much pleased by my acquiescence, that i was 
pleased too. at his particular request, i appointed to call for him 
at the castle at half-past eight on monday morning, and so we 
parted for the time. 
punctual to my appointment, i rang at the castle gate on the monday 
morning, and was received by wemmick himself: who struck me as 
looking tighter than usual, and having a sleeker hat on. within, 
there were two glasses of rum-and-milk prepared, and two biscuits. 
the aged must have been stirring with the lark, for, glancing into 
the perspective of his bedroom, i observed that his bed was empty. 
when we had fortified ourselves with the rum-and-milk and biscuits, 
and were going out for the walk with that training preparation on 
us, i was considerably surprised to see wemmick take up a 
fishing-rod, and put it over his shoulder. "why, we are not going 
fishing!" said i. "no," returned wemmick, "but i like to walk with 
one." 
i thought this odd; however, i said nothing, and we set off. we 
went towards camberwell green, and when we were thereabouts, 
wemmick said suddenly: 
"halloa! here's a church!" 
there was nothing very surprising in that; but a gain, i was rather 
surprised, when he said, as if he were animated by a brilliant 
idea: 
"let's go in!" 
we went in, wemmick leaving his fishing-rod in the porch, and 
looked all round. in the mean time, wemmick was diving into his 
coat-pockets, and getting something out of paper there. 
"halloa!" said he. "here's a couple of pair of gloves! let's put 
'em on!" 
as the gloves were white kid gloves, and as the post-office was 
widened to its utmost extent, i now began to have my strong 
suspicions. they were strengthened into certainty when i beheld the 
aged enter at a side door, escorting a lady. 
"halloa!" said wemmick. "here's miss skiffins! let's have a 
wedding." 
that discreet damsel was attired as usual, except that she was now 
engaged in substituting for her green kid gloves, a pair of white. 
the aged was likewise occupied in preparing a similar sacrifice for 
the altar of hymen. the old gentleman, however, experienced so much 
difficulty in getting his gloves on, that wemmick found it 
necessary to put him with his back against a pillar, and then to 
get behind the pillar himself and pull away at them, while i for my 
part held the old gentleman round the waist, that he might present 
and equal and safe resistance. by dint of this ingenious scheme, 
his gloves were got on to perfection. 
the clerk and clergyman then appearing, we were ranged in order at 
those fatal rails. true to his notion of seeming to do it all 
without preparation, i heard wemmick say to himself as he took 
something out of his waistcoat-pocket before the service began, 
"halloa! here's a ring!" 
i acted in the capacity of backer, or best-man, to the bridegroom; 
while a little limp pew opener in a soft bonnet like a baby's, made 
a feint of being the bosom friend of miss skiffins. the 
responsibility of giving the lady away, devolved upon the aged, 
which led to the clergyman's being unintentionally scandalized, and 
it happened thus. when he said, "who giveth this woman to be 
married to this man?" the old gentlemen, not in the least knowing 
what point of the ceremony we had arrived at, stood most amiably 
beaming at the ten commandments. upon which, the clergyman said 
again, "who giveth this woman to be married to this man?" the old 
gentleman being still in a state of most estimable unconsciousness, 
the bridegroom cried out in his accustomed voice, "now aged p. you 
know; who giveth?" to which the aged replied with great briskness, 
before saying that he gave, "all right, john, all right, my boy!" 
and the clergyman came to so gloomy a pause upon it, that i had 
doubts for the moment whether we should get completely married that 
day. 
it was completely done, however, and when we were going out of 
church, wemmick took the cover off the font, and put his white 
gloves in it, and put the cover on again. mrs. wemmick, more heedful 
of the future, put her white gloves in her pocket and assumed her 
green. "now, mr. pip," said wemmick, triumphantly shouldering the 
fishing-rod as we came out, "let me ask you whether anybody would 
suppose this to be a wedding-party!" 
breakfast had been ordered at a pleasant little tavern, a mile or 
so away upon the rising ground beyond the green, and there was a 
bagatelle board in the room, in case we should desire to unbend our 
minds after the solemnity. it was pleasant to observe that mrs. 
wemmick no longer unwound wemmick's arm when it adapted itself to 
her figure, but sat in a high-backed chair against the wall, like a 
violoncello in its case, and submitted to be embraced as that 
melodious instrument might have done. 
we had an excellent breakfast, and when any one declined anything 
on table, wemmick said, "provided by contract, you know; don't be 
afraid of it!" i drank to the new couple, drank to the aged, drank 
to the castle, saluted the bride at parting, and made myself as 
agreeable as i could. 
wemmick came down to the door with me, and i again shook hands with 
him, and wished him joy. 
"thankee!" said wemmick, rubbing his hands. "she's such a manager 
of fowls, you have no idea. you shall have some eggs, and judge for 
yourself. i say, mr. pip!" calling me back, and speaking low. "this 
is altogether a walworth sentiment, please." 
"i understand. not to be mentioned in little britain," said i. 
wemmick nodded. "after what you let out the other day, mr. jaggers 
may as well not know of it. he might think my brain was softening, 
or something of the kind." 
chapter 56 
he lay in prison very ill, during the whole interval between his 
committal for trial, and the coming round of the sessions. he had 
broken two ribs, they had wounded one of his lungs, and he breathed 
with great pain and difficulty, which increased daily. it was a 
consequence of his hurt, that he spoke so low as to be scarcely 
audible; therefore, he spoke very little. but, he was ever ready to 
listen to me, and it became the first duty of my life to say to 
him, and read to him, what i knew he ought to hear. 
being far too ill to remain in the common prison, he was removed, 
after the first day or so, into the infirmary. this gave me 
opportunities of being with him that i could not otherwise have 
had. and but for his illness he would have been put in irons, for 
he was regarded as a determined prison-breaker, and i know not what 
else. 
although i saw him every day, it was for only a short time; hence, 
the regularly recurring spaces of our separation were long enough 
to record on his face any slight changes that occurred in his 
physical state. i do not recollect that i once saw any change in it 
for the better; he wasted, and became slowly weaker and worse, day 
by day, from the day when the prison door closed upon him. 
the kind of submission or resignation that he showed, was that of a 
man who was tired out. i sometimes derived an impression, from his 
manner or from a whispered word or two which escaped him, that he 
pondered over the question whether he might have been a better man 
under better circumstances. but, he never justified himself by a 
hint tending that way, or tried to bend the past out of its eternal 
shape. 
it happened on two or three occasions in my presence, that his 
desperate reputation was alluded to by one or other of the people 
in attendance on him. a smile crossed his face then, and he turned 
his eyes on me with a trustful look, as if he were confident that i 
had seen some small redeeming touch in him, even so long ago as when 
i was a little child. as to all the rest, he was humble and 
contrite, and i never knew him complain. 
when the sessions came round, mr. jaggers caused an application to 
be made for the postponement of his trial until the following 
sessions. it was obviously made with the assurance that he could 
not live so long, and was refused. the trial came on at once, and, 
when he was put to the bar, he was seated in a chair. no objection 
was made to my getting close to the dock, on the outside of it, and 
holding the hand that he stretched forth to me. 
the trial was very short and very clear. such things as could be 
said for him, were said - how he had taken to industrious habits, 
and had thriven lawfully and reputably. but, nothing could unsay 
the fact that he had returned, and was there in presence of the 
judge and jury. it was impossible to try him for that, and do 
otherwise than find him guilty. 
at that time, it was the custom (as i learnt from my terrible 
experience of that sessions) to devote a concluding day to the 
passing of sentences, and to make a finishing effect with the 
sentence of death. but for the indelible picture that my 
remembrance now holds before me, i could scarcely believe, even as 
i write these words, that i saw two-and-thirty men and women put 
before the judge to receive that sentence together. foremost among 
the two-and-thirty, was he; seated, that he might get breath enough 
to keep life in him. 
the whole scene starts out again in the vivid colours of the 
moment, down to the drops of april rain on the windows of the 
court, glittering in the rays of april sun. penned in the dock, as 
i again stood outside it at the corner with his hand in mine, were 
the two-and-thirty men and women; some defiant, some stricken with 
terror, some sobbing and weeping, some covering their faces, some 
staring gloomily about. there had been shrieks from among the women 
convicts, but they had been stilled, a hush had succeeded. the 
sheriffs with their great chains and nosegays, other civic gewgaws 
and monsters, criers, ushers, a great gallery full of people - a 
large theatrical audience - looked on, as the two-and-thirty and 
the judge were solemnly confronted. then, the judge addressed them. 
among the wretched creatures before him whom he must single out for 
special address, was one who almost from his infancy had been an 
offender against the laws; who, after repeated imprisonments and 
punishments, had been at length sentenced to exile for a term of 
years; and who, under circumstances of great violence and daring 
had made his escape and been re-sentenced to exile for life. that 
miserable man would seem for a time to have become convinced of his 
errors, when far removed from the scenes of his old offences, and 
to have lived a peaceable and honest life. but in a fatal moment, 
yielding to those propensities and passions, the indulgence of 
which had so long rendered him a scourge to society, he had quitted 
his haven of rest and repentance, and had come back to the country 
where he was proscribed. being here presently denounced, he had for 
a time succeeded in evading the officers of justice, but being at 
length seized while in the act of flight, he had resisted them, and 
had - he best knew whether by express design, or in the blindness 
of his hardihood - caused the death of his denouncer, to whom his 
whole career was known. the appointed punishment for his return to 
the land that had cast him out, being death, and his case being 
this aggravated case, he must prepare himself to die. 
the sun was striking in at the great windows of the court, through 
the glittering drops of rain upon the glass, and it made a broad 
shaft of light between the two-and-thirty and the judge, linking 
both together, and perhaps reminding some among the audience, how 
both were passing on, with absolute equality, to the greater 
judgment that knoweth all things and cannot err. rising for a 
moment, a distinct speck of face in this way of light, the prisoner 
said, "my lord, i have received my sentence of death from the 
almighty, but i bow to yours," and sat down again. there was some 
hushing, and the judge went on with what he had to say to the rest. 
then, they were all formally doomed, and some of them were 
supported out, and some of them sauntered out with a haggard look 
of bravery, and a few nodded to the gallery, and two or three shook 
hands, and others went out chewing the fragments of herb they had 
taken from the sweet herbs lying about. he went last of all, 
because of having to be helped from his chair and to go very 
slowly; and he held my hand while all the others were removed, and 
while the audience got up (putting their dresses right, as they 
might at church or elsewhere) and pointed down at this criminal or 
at that, and most of all at him and me. 
i earnestly hoped and prayed that he might die before the 
recorder's report was made, but, in the dread of his lingering on, 
i began that night to write out a petition to the home secretary of 
state, setting forth my knowledge of him, and how it was that he 
had come back for my sake. i wrote it as fervently and pathetically 
as i could, and when i had finished it and sent it in, i wrote out 
other petitions to such men in authority as i hoped were the most 
merciful, and drew up one to the crown itself. for several days and 
nights after he was sentenced i took no rest except when i fell 
asleep in my chair, but was wholly absorbed in these appeals. and 
after i had sent them in, i could not keep away from the places 
where they were, but felt as if they were more hopeful and less 
desperate when i was near them. in this unreasonable restlessness 
and pain of mind, i would roam the streets of an evening, wandering 
by those offices and houses where i had left the petitions. to the 
present hour, the weary western streets of london on a cold dusty 
spring night, with their ranges of stern shut-up mansions and their 
long rows of lamps, are melancholy to me from this association. 
the daily visits i could make him were shortened now, and he was 
more strictly kept. seeing, or fancying, that i was suspected of an 
intention of carrying poison to him, i asked to be searched before 
i sat down at his bedside, and told the officer who was always 
there, that i was willing to do anything that would assure him of 
the singleness of my designs. nobody was hard with him, or with me. 
there was duty to be done, and it was done, but not harshly. the 
officer always gave me the assurance that he was worse, and some 
other sick prisoners in the room, and some other prisoners who 
attended on them as sick nurses (malefactors, but not incapable of 
kindness, god be thanked!), always joined in the same report. 
as the days went on, i noticed more and more that he would lie 
placidly looking at the white ceiling, with an absence of light in 
his face, until some word of mine brightened it for an instant, and 
then it would subside again. sometimes he was almost, or quite, 
unable to speak; then, he would answer me with slight pressures on 
my hand, and i grew to understand his meaning very well. 
the number of the days had risen to ten, when i saw a greater 
change in him than i had seen yet. his eyes were turned towards the 
door, and lighted up as i entered. 
"dear boy," he said, as i sat down by his bed: "i thought you was 
late. but i knowed you couldn't be that." 
"it is just the time," said i. "i waited for it at the gate." 
"you always waits at the gate; don't you, dear boy?" 
"yes. not to lose a moment of the time." 
"thank'ee dear boy, thank'ee. god bless you! you've never deserted 
me, dear boy." 
i pressed his hand in silence, for i could not forget that i had 
once meant to desert him. 
"and what's the best of all," he said, "you've been more 
comfortable alonger me, since i was under a dark cloud, than when 
the sun shone. that's best of all." 
he lay on his back, breathing with great difficulty. do what he 
would, and love me though he did, the light left his face ever and 
again, and a film came over the placid look at the white ceiling. 
"are you in much pain to-day?" 
"i don't complain of none, dear boy." 
"you never do complain." 
he had spoken his last words. he smiled, and i understood his touch 
to mean that he wished to lift my hand, and lay it on his breast. i 
laid it there, and he smiled again, and put both his hands upon it. 
the allotted time ran out, while we were thus; but, looking round, 
i found the governor of the prison standing near me, and he 
whispered, "you needn't go yet." i thanked him gratefully, and 
asked, "might i speak to him, if he can hear me?" 
the governor stepped aside, and beckoned the officer away. the 
change, though it was made without noise, drew back the film from 
the placid look at the white ceiling, and he looked most 
affectionately at me. 
"dear magwitch, i must tell you, now at last. you understand what i 
say?" 
a gentle pressure on my hand. 
"you had a child once, whom you loved and lost." 
a stronger pressure on my hand. 
"she lived and found powerful friends. she is living now. she is a 
lady and very beautiful. and i love her!" 
with a last faint effort, which would have been powerless but for 
my yielding to it and assisting it, he raised my hand to his lips. 
then, he gently let it sink upon his breast again, with his own 
hands lying on it. the placid look at the white ceiling came back, 
and passed away, and his head dropped quietly on his breast. 
mindful, then, of what we had read together, i thought of the two 
men who went up into the temple to pray, and i knew there were no 
better words that i could say beside his bed, than "o lord, be 
merciful to him, a sinner!" 
chapter 57 
now that i was left wholly to myself, i gave notice of my intention 
to quit the chambers in the temple as soon as my tenancy could 
legally determine, and in the meanwhile to underlet them. at once i 
put bills up in the windows; for, i was in debt, and had scarcely 
any money, and began to be seriously alarmed by the state of my 
affairs. i ought rather to write that i should have been alarmed if 
i had had energy and concentration enough to help me to the clear 
perception of any truth beyond the fact that i was falling very 
ill. the late stress upon me had enabled me to put off illness, but 
not to put it away; i knew that it was coming on me now, and i knew 
very little else, and was even careless as to that. 
for a day or two, i lay on the sofa, or on the floor - anywhere, 
according as i happened to sink down - with a heavy head and aching 
limbs, and no purpose, and no power. then there came one night 
which appeared of great duration, and which teemed with anxiety and 
horror; and when in the morning i tried to sit up in my bed and 
think of it, i found i could not do so. 
whether i really had been down in garden court in the dead of the 
night, groping about for the boat that i supposed to be there; 
whether i had two or three times come to myself on the staircase 
with great terror, not knowing how i had got out of bed; whether i 
had found myself lighting the lamp, possessed by the idea that he 
was coming up the stairs, and that the lights were blown out; 
whether i had been inexpressibly harassed by the distracted 
talking, laughing, and groaning, of some one, and had half 
suspected those sounds to be of my own making; whether there had 
been a closed iron furnace in a dark corner of the room, and a 
voice had called out over and over again that miss havisham was 
consuming within it; these were things that i tried to settle with 
myself and get into some order, as i lay that morning on my bed. 
but, the vapour of a limekiln would come between me and them, 
disordering them all, and it was through the vapour at last that i 
saw two men looking at me. 
"what do you want?" i asked, starting; "i don't know you." 
"well, sir," returned one of them, bending down and touching me on 
the shoulder, "this is a matter that you'll soon arrange, i dare 
say, but you're arrested." 
"what is the debt?" 
"hundred and twenty-three pound, fifteen, six. jeweller's account, 
i think." 
"what is to be done?" 
"you had better come to my house," said the man. "i keep a very 
nice house." 
i made some attempt to get up and dress myself. when i next 
attended to them, they were standing a little off from the bed, 
looking at me. i still lay there. 
"you see my state," said i. "i would come with you if i could; but 
indeed i am quite unable. if you take me from here, i think i shall 
die by the way." 
perhaps they replied, or argued the point, or tried to encourage me 
to believe that i was better than i thought. forasmuch as they hang 
in my memory by only this one slender thread, i don't know what 
they did, except that they forbore to remove me. 
that i had a fever and was avoided, that i suffered greatly, that i 
often lost my reason, that the time seemed interminable, that i 
confounded impossible existences with my own identity; that i was a 
brick in the house wall, and yet entreating to be released from the 
giddy place where the builders had set me; that i was a steel beam 
of a vast engine, clashing and whirling over a gulf, and yet that i 
implored in my own person to have the engine stopped, and my part 
in it hammered off; that i passed through these phases of disease, 
i know of my own remembrance, and did in some sort know at the 
time. that i sometimes struggled with real people, in the belief 
that they were murderers, and that i would all at once comprehend 
that they meant to do me good, and would then sink exhausted in 
their arms, and suffer them to lay me down, i also knew at the 
time. but, above all, i knew that there was a constant tendency in 
all these people - who, when i was very ill, would present all 
kinds of extraordinary transformations of the human face, and would 
be much dilated in size - above all, i say, i knew that there was 
an extraordinary tendency in all these people, sooner or later to 
settle down into the likeness of joe. 
after i had turned the worst point of my illness, i began to notice 
that while all its other features changed, this one consistent 
feature did not change. whoever came about me, still settled down 
into joe. i opened my eyes in the night, and i saw in the great 
chair at the bedside, joe. i opened my eyes in the day, and, 
sitting on the window-seat, smoking his pipe in the shaded open 
window, still i saw joe. i asked for cooling drink, and the dear 
hand that gave it me was joe's. i sank back on my pillow after 
drinking, and the face that looked so hopefully and tenderly upon 
me was the face of joe. 
at last, one day, i took courage, and said, "is it joe?" 
and the dear old home-voice answered, "which it air, old chap." 
"o joe, you break my heart! look angry at me, joe. strike me, joe. 
tell me of my ingratitude. don't be so good to me!" 
for, joe had actually laid his head down on the pillow at my side 
and put his arm round my neck, in his joy that i knew him. 
"which dear old pip, old chap," said joe, "you and me was ever 
friends. and when you're well enough to go out for a ride - what 
larks!" 
after which, joe withdrew to the window, and stood with his back 
towards me, wiping his eyes. and as my extreme weakness prevented 
me from getting up and going to him, i lay there, penitently 
whispering, "o god bless him! o god bless this gentle christian 
man!" 
joe's eyes were red when i next found him beside me; but, i was 
holding his hand, and we both felt happy. 
"how long, dear joe?" 
"which you meantersay, pip, how long have your illness lasted, dear 
old chap?" 
"yes, joe." 
"it's the end of may, pip. to-morrow is the first of june." 
"and have you been here all that time, dear joe?" 
"pretty nigh, old chap. for, as i says to biddy when the news of 
your being ill were brought by letter, which it were brought by the 
post and being formerly single he is now married though underpaid 
for a deal of walking and shoe-leather, but wealth were not a 
object on his part, and marriage were the great wish of his hart-" 
"it is so delightful to hear you, joe! but i interrupt you in what 
you said to biddy." 
"which it were," said joe, "that how you might be amongst 
strangers, and that how you and me having been ever friends, a 
wisit at such a moment might not prove unacceptabobble. and biddy, 
her word were, 'go to him, without loss of time.' that," said joe, 
summing up with his judicial air, "were the word of biddy. 'go to 
him,' biddy say, 'without loss of time.' in short, i shouldn't 
greatly deceive you," joe added, after a little grave reflection, 
"if i represented to you that the word of that young woman were, 
'without a minute's loss of time.'" 
there joe cut himself short, and informed me that i was to be 
talked to in great moderation, and that i was to take a little 
nourishment at stated frequent times, whether i felt inclined for 
it or not, and that i was to submit myself to all his orders. so, i 
kissed his hand, and lay quiet, while he proceeded to indite a note 
to biddy, with my love in it. 
evidently, biddy had taught joe to write. as i lay in bed looking 
at him, it made me, in my weak state, cry again with pleasure to 
see the pride with which he set about his letter. my bedstead, 
divested of its curtains, had been removed, with me upon it, into 
the sittingroom, as the airiest and largest, and the carpet had 
been taken away, and the room kept always fresh and wholesome night 
and day. at my own writing-table, pushed into a corner and cumbered 
with little bottles, joe now sat down to his great work, first 
choosing a pen from the pen-tray as if it were a chest of large 
tools, and tucking up his sleeves as if he were going to wield a 
crowbar or sledgehammer. it was necessary for joe to hold on 
heavily to the table with his left elbow, and to get his right leg 
well out behind him, before he could begin, and when he did begin, 
he made every down-stroke so slowly that it might have been six 
feet long, while at every up-stroke i could hear his pen 
spluttering extensively. he had a curious idea that the inkstand 
was on the side of him where it was not, and constantly dipped his 
pen into space, and seemed quite satisfied with the result. 
occasionally, he was tripped up by some orthographical 
stumbling-block, but on the whole he got on very well indeed, and 
when he had signed his name, and had removed a finishing blot from 
the paper to the crown of his head with his two forefingers, he got 
up and hovered about the table, trying the effect of his 
performance from various points of view as it lay there, with 
unbounded satisfaction. 
not to make joe uneasy by talking too much, even if i had been able 
to talk much, i deferred asking him about miss havisham until next 
day. he shook his head when i then asked him if she had recovered. 
"is she dead, joe?" 
"why you see, old chap," said joe, in a tone of remonstrance, and 
by way of getting at it by degrees, "i wouldn't go so far as to say 
that, for that's a deal to say; but she ain't-" 
"living, joe?" 
"that's nigher where it is," said joe; "she ain't living." 
"did she linger long, joe?" 
"arter you was took ill, pretty much about what you might call (if 
you was put to it) a week," said joe; still determined, on my 
account, to come at everything by degrees. 
"dear joe, have you heard what becomes of her property?" 
"well, old chap," said joe, "it do appear that she had settled the 
most of it, which i meantersay tied it up, on miss estella. but she 
had wrote out a little coddleshell in her own hand a day or two 
afore the accident, leaving a cool four thousand to mr. matthew 
pocket. and why, do you suppose, above all things, pip, she left 
that cool four thousand unto him? 'because of pip's account of him 
the said matthew.' i am told by biddy, that air the writing," said 
joe, repeating the legal turn as if it did him infinite good, 
"'account of him the said matthew.' and a cool four thousand, pip!" 
i never discovered from whom joe derived the conventional 
temperature of the four thousand pounds, but it appeared to make 
the sum of money more to him, and he had a manifest relish in 
insisting on its being cool. 
this account gave me great joy, as it perfected the only good thing 
i had done. i asked joe whether he had heard if any of the other 
relations had any legacies? 
"miss sarah," said joe, "she have twenty-five pound perannium fur 
to buy pills, on account of being bilious. miss georgiana, she have 
twenty pound down. mrs. - what's the name of them wild beasts with 
humps, old chap?" 
"camels?" said i, wondering why he could possibly want to know. 
joe nodded. "mrs. camels," by which i presently understood he meant 
camilla, "she have five pound fur to buy rushlights to put her in 
spirits when she wake up in the night." 
the accuracy of these recitals was sufficiently obvious to me, to 
give me great confidence in joe's information. "and now," said joe, 
"you ain't that strong yet, old chap, that you can take in more nor 
one additional shovel-full to-day. old orlick he's been a 
bustin' open a dwelling-ouse." 
"whose?" said i. 
"not, i grant, you, but what his manners is given to blusterous," 
said joe, apologetically; "still, a englishman's ouse is his 
castle, and castles must not be busted 'cept when done in war time. 
and wotsume'er the failings on his part, he were a corn and 
seedsman in his hart." 
"is it pumblechook's house that has been broken into, then?" 
"that's it, pip," said joe; "and they took his till, and they took 
his cash-box, and they drinked his wine, and they partook of his 
wittles, and they slapped his face, and they pulled his nose, and 
they tied him up to his bedpust, and they giv' him a dozen, and 
they stuffed his mouth full of flowering annuals to prewent his 
crying out. but he knowed orlick, and orlick's in the county 
jail." 
by these approaches we arrived at unrestricted conversation. i was 
slow to gain strength, but i did slowly and surely become less 
weak, and joe stayed with me, and i fancied i was little pip again. 
for, the tenderness of joe was so beautifully proportioned to my 
need, that i was like a child in his hands. he would sit and talk 
to me in the old confidence, and with the old simplicity, and in 
the old unassertive protecting way, so that i would half believe 
that all my life since the days of the old kitchen was one of the 
mental troubles of the fever that was gone. he did everything for 
me except the household work, for which he had engaged a very 
decent woman, after paying off the laundress on his first arrival. 
"which i do assure you, pip," he would often say, in explanation of 
that liberty; "i found her a tapping the spare bed, like a cask of 
beer, and drawing off the feathers in a bucket, for sale. which she 
would have tapped yourn next, and draw'd it off with you a laying 
on it, and was then a carrying away the coals gradiwally in the 
souptureen and wegetable-dishes, and the wine and spirits in your 
wellington boots." 
we looked forward to the day when i should go out for a ride, as we 
had once looked forward to the day of my apprenticeship. and when 
the day came, and an open carriage was got into the lane, joe 
wrapped me up, took me in his arms, carried me down to it, and put 
me in, as if i were still the small helpless creature to whom he 
had so abundantly given of the wealth of his great nature. 
and joe got in beside me, and we drove away together into the 
country, where the rich summer growth was already on the trees and 
on the grass, and sweet summer scents filled all the air. the day 
happened to be sunday, and when i looked on the loveliness around 
me, and thought how it had grown and changed, and how the little 
wild flowers had been forming, and the voices of the birds had been 
strengthening, by day and by night, under the sun and under the 
stars, while poor i lay burning and tossing on my bed, the mere 
remembrance of having burned and tossed there, came like a check 
upon my peace. but, when i heard the sunday bells, and looked 
around a little more upon the outspread beauty, i felt that i was 
not nearly thankful enough - that i was too weak yet, to be even 
that - and i laid my head on joe's shoulder, as i had laid it long 
ago when he had taken me to the fair or where not, and it was too 
much for my young senses. 
more composure came to me after a while, and we talked as we used 
to talk, lying on the grass at the old battery. there was no change 
whatever in joe. exactly what he had been in my eyes then, he was 
in my eyes still; just as simply faithful, and as simply right. 
when we got back again and he lifted me out, and carried me - so 
easily - across the court and up the stairs, i thought of that 
eventful christmas day when he had carried me over the marshes. we 
had not yet made any allusion to my change of fortune, nor did i 
know how much of my late history he was acquainted with. i was so 
doubtful of myself now, and put so much trust in him, that i could 
not satisfy myself whether i ought to refer to it when he did not. 
"have you heard, joe," i asked him that evening, upon further 
consideration, as he smoked his pipe at the window, "who my patron 
was?" 
"i heerd," returned joe, "as it were not miss havisham, old chap." 
"did you hear who it was, joe?" 
"well! i heerd as it were a person what sent the person what 
giv' you the bank-notes at the jolly bargemen, pip." 
"so it was." 
"astonishing!" said joe, in the placidest way. 
"did you hear that he was dead, joe?" i presently asked, with 
increasing diffidence. 
"which? him as sent the bank-notes, pip?" 
"yes." 
"i think," said joe, after meditating a long time, and looking 
rather evasively at the window-seat, "as i did hear tell that how 
he were something or another in a general way in that direction." 
"did you hear anything of his circumstances, joe?" 
"not partickler, pip." 
"if you would like to hear, joe-" i was beginning, when joe got up 
and came to my sofa. 
"lookee here, old chap," said joe, bending over me. "ever the best 
of friends; ain't us, pip?" 
i was ashamed to answer him. 
"wery good, then," said joe, as if i had answered; "that's all 
right, that's agreed upon. then why go into subjects, old chap, 
which as betwixt two sech must be for ever onnecessary? there's 
subjects enough as betwixt two sech, without onnecessary ones. 
lord! to think of your poor sister and her rampages! and don't you 
remember tickler?" 
"i do indeed, joe." 
"lookee here, old chap," said joe. "i done what i could to keep you 
and tickler in sunders, but my power were not always fully equal to 
my inclinations. for when your poor sister had a mind to drop into 
you, it were not so much," said joe, in his favourite argumentative 
way, "that she dropped into me too, if i put myself in opposition 
to her but that she dropped into you always heavier for it. i 
noticed that. it ain't a grab at a man's whisker, not yet a shake 
or two of a man (to which your sister was quite welcome), that 'ud 
put a man off from getting a little child out of punishment. but 
when that little child is dropped into, heavier, for that grab of 
whisker or shaking, then that man naterally up and says to himself, 
'where is the good as you are a-doing? i grant you i see the 'arm,' 
says the man, 'but i don't see the good. i call upon you, sir, 
therefore, to pint out the good.'" 
"the man says?" i observed, as joe waited for me to speak. 
"the man says," joe assented. "is he right, that man?" 
"dear joe, he is always right." 
"well, old chap," said joe, "then abide by your words. if he's 
always right (which in general he's more likely wrong), he's right 
when he says this: - supposing ever you kep any little matter to 
yourself, when you was a little child, you kep it mostly because 
you know'd as j. gargery's power to part you and tickler in 
sunders, were not fully equal to his inclinations. therefore, think 
no more of it as betwixt two sech, and do not let us pass remarks 
upon onnecessary subjects. biddy giv' herself a deal o' trouble 
with me afore i left (for i am almost awful dull), as i should view 
it in this light, and, viewing it in this light, as i should so put 
it. both of which," said joe, quite charmed with his logical 
arrangement, "being done, now this to you a true friend, say. 
namely. you mustn't go a-over-doing on it, but you must have your 
supper and your wine-and-water, and you must be put betwixt the 
sheets." 
the delicacy with which joe dismissed this theme, and the sweet 
tact and kindness with which biddy - who with her woman's wit had 
found me out so soon - had prepared him for it, made a deep 
impression on my mind. but whether joe knew how poor i was, and how 
my great expectations had all dissolved, like our own marsh mists 
before the sun, i could not understand. 
another thing in joe that i could not understand when it first 
began to develop itself, but which i soon arrived at a sorrowful 
comprehension of, was this: as i became stronger and better, joe 
became a little less easy with me. in my weakness and entire 
dependence on him, the dear fellow had fallen into the old tone, 
and called me by the old names, the dear "old pip, old chap," that 
now were music in my ears. i too had fallen into the old ways, only 
happy and thankful that he let me. but, imperceptibly, though i 
held by them fast, joe's hold upon them began to slacken; and 
whereas i wondered at this, at first, i soon began to understand 
that the cause of it was in me, and that the fault of it was all 
mine. 
ah! had i given joe no reason to doubt my constancy, and to think 
that in prosperity i should grow cold to him and cast him off? had 
i given joe's innocent heart no cause to feel instinctively that as 
i got stronger, his hold upon me would be weaker, and that he had 
better loosen it in time and let me go, before i plucked myself 
away? 
it was on the third or fourth occasion of my going out walking in 
the temple gardens leaning on joe's arm, that i saw this change in 
him very plainly. we had been sitting in the bright warm sunlight, 
looking at the river, and i chanced to say as we got up: 
"see, joe! i can walk quite strongly. now, you shall see me walk 
back by myself." 
"which do not over-do it, pip," said joe; "but i shall be happy fur 
to see you able, sir." 
the last word grated on me; but how could i remonstrate! i walked 
no further than the gate of the gardens, and then pretended to be 
weaker than i was, and asked joe for his arm. joe gave it me, but 
was thoughtful. 
i, for my part, was thoughtful too; for, how best to check this 
growing change in joe, was a great perplexity to my remorseful 
thoughts. that i was ashamed to tell him exactly how i was placed, 
and what i had come down to, i do not seek to conceal; but, i hope 
my reluctance was not quite an unworthy one. he would want to help 
me out of his little savings, i knew, and i knew that he ought not 
to help me, and that i must not suffer him to do it. 
it was a thoughtful evening with both of us. but, before we went to 
bed, i had resolved that i would wait over to-morrow, to-morrow 
being sunday, and would begin my new course with the new week. on 
monday morning i would speak to joe about this change, i would lay 
aside this last vestige of reserve, i would tell him what i had in 
my thoughts (that secondly, not yet arrived at), and why i had not 
decided to go out to herbert, and then the change would be 
conquered for ever. as i cleared, joe cleared, and it seemed as 
though he had sympathetically arrived at a resolution too. 
we had a quiet day on the sunday, and we rode out into the country, 
and then walked in the fields. 
"i feel thankful that i have been ill, joe," i said. 
"dear old pip, old chap, you're a'most come round, sir." 
"it has been a memorable time for me, joe." 
"likeways for myself, sir," joe returned. 
"we have had a time together, joe, that i can never forget. there 
were days once, i know, that i did for a while forget; but i never 
shall forget these." 
"pip," said joe, appearing a little hurried and troubled, "there 
has been larks, and, dear sir, what have been betwixt us - have 
been." 
at night, when i had gone to bed, joe came into my room, as he had 
done all through my recovery. he asked me if i felt sure that i was 
as well as in the morning? 
"yes, dear joe, quite." 
"and are always a-getting stronger, old chap?" 
"yes, dear joe, steadily." 
joe patted the coverlet on my shoulder with his great good hand, 
and said, in what i thought a husky voice, "good night!" 
when i got up in the morning, refreshed and stronger yet, i was 
full of my resolution to tell joe all, without delay. i would tell 
him before breakfast. i would dress at once and go to his room and 
surprise him; for, it was the first day i had been up early. i went 
to his room, and he was not there. not only was he not there, but 
his box was gone. 
i hurried then to the breakfast-table, and on it found a letter. 
these were its brief contents. 
"not wishful to intrude i have departured fur you are well again 
dear pip and will do better without jo. 
"p.s. ever the best of friends." 
enclosed in the letter, was a receipt for the debt and costs on 
which i had been arrested. down to that moment i had vainly 
supposed that my creditor had withdrawn or suspended proceedings 
until i should be quite recovered. i had never dreamed of joe's 
having paid the money; but, joe had paid it, and the receipt was in 
his name. 
what remained for me now, but to follow him to the dear old forge, 
and there to have out my disclosure to him, and my penitent 
remonstrance with him, and there to relieve my mind and heart of 
that reserved secondly, which had begun as a vague something 
lingering in my thoughts, and had formed into a settled purpose? 
the purpose was, that i would go to biddy, that i would show her 
how humbled and repentant i came back, that i would tell her how i 
had lost all i once hoped for, that i would remind her of our old 
confidences in my first unhappy time. then, i would say to her, 
"biddy, i think you once liked me very well, when my errant heart, 
even while it strayed away from you, was quieter and better with 
you than it ever has been since. if you can like me only half as 
well once more, if you can take me with all my faults and 
disappointments on my head, if you can receive me like a forgiven 
child (and indeed i am as sorry, biddy, and have as much need of a 
hushing voice and a soothing hand), i hope i am a little worthier 
of you that i was - not much, but a little. and, biddy, it shall 
rest with you to say whether i shall work at the forge with joe, or 
whether i shall try for any different occupation down in this 
country, or whether we shall go away to a distant place where an 
opportunity awaits me, which i set aside when it was offered, until 
i knew your answer. and now, dear biddy, if you can tell me that 
you will go through the world with me, you will surely make it a 
better world for me, and me a better man for it, and i will try 
hard to make it a better world for you." 
such was my purpose. after three days more of recovery, i went down 
to the old place, to put it in execution; and how i sped in it, is 
all i have left to tell. 
chapter 58 
the tidings of my high fortunes having had a heavy fall, had got 
down to my native place and its neighbourhood, before i got there. 
i found the blue boar in possession of the intelligence, and i 
found that it made a great change in the boar's demeanour. whereas 
the boar had cultivated my good opinion with warm assiduity when i 
was coming into property, the boar was exceedingly cool on the 
subject now that i was going out of property. 
it was evening when i arrived, much fatigued by the journey i had 
so often made so easily. the boar could not put me into my usual 
bedroom, which was engaged (probably by some one who had 
expectations), and could only assign me a very indifferent chamber 
among the pigeons and post-chaises up the yard. but, i had as sound 
a sleep in that lodging as in the most superior accommodation the 
boar could have given me, and the quality of my dreams was about 
the same as in the best bedroom. 
early in the morning while my breakfast was getting ready, i 
strolled round by satis house. there were printed bills on the 
gate, and on bits of carpet hanging out of the windows, announcing 
a sale by auction of the household furniture and effects, next 
week. the house itself was to be sold as old building materials and 
pulled down. lot 1 was marked in whitewashed knock-knee letters on 
the brew house; lot 2 on that part of the main building which had 
been so long shut up. other lots were marked off on other parts of 
the structure, and the ivy had been torn down to make room for the 
inscriptions, and much of it trailed low in the dust and was 
withered already. stepping in for a moment at the open gate and 
looking around me with the uncomfortable air of a stranger who had 
no business there, i saw the auctioneer's clerk walking on the 
casks and telling them off for the information of a catalogue 
compiler, pen in hand, who made a temporary desk of the wheeled 
chair i had so often pushed along to the tune of old clem. 
when i got back to my breakfast in the boar's coffee-room, i found 
mr. pumblechook conversing with the landlord. mr. pumblechook (not 
improved in appearance by his late nocturnal adventure) was waiting 
for me, and addressed me in the following terms. 
"young man, i am sorry to see you brought low. but what else could 
be expected! what else could be expected!" 
as he extended his hand with a magnificently forgiving air, and as 
i was broken by illness and unfit to quarrel, i took it. 
"william," said mr. pumblechook to the waiter, "put a muffin on 
table. and has it come to this! has it come to this!" 
i frowningly sat down to my breakfast. mr. pumblechook stood over me 
and poured out my tea - before i could touch the teapot - with the 
air of a benefactor who was resolved to be true to the last. 
"william," said mr. pumblechook, mournfully, "put the salt on. in 
happier times," addressing me, "i think you took sugar. and did you 
take milk? you did. sugar and milk. william, bring a watercress." 
"thank you," said i, shortly, "but i don't eat watercresses." 
"you don't eat 'em," returned mr. pumblechook, sighing and nodding 
his head several times, as if he might have expected that, and as 
if abstinence from watercresses were consistent with my downfall. 
"true. the simple fruits of the earth. no. you needn't bring any, 
william." 
i went on with my breakfast, and mr. pumblechook continued to stand 
over me, staring fishily and breathing noisily, as he always did. 
"little more than skin and bone!" mused mr. pumblechook, aloud. "and 
yet when he went from here (i may say with my blessing), and i 
spread afore him my humble store, like the bee, he was as plump as 
a peach!" 
this reminded me of the wonderful difference between the servile 
manner in which he had offered his hand in my new prosperity, 
saying, "may i?" and the ostentatious clemency with which he had 
just now exhibited the same fat five fingers. 
"hah!" he went on, handing me the bread-and-butter. "and air you 
a-going to joseph?" 
"in heaven's name," said i, firing in spite of myself, "what does 
it matter to you where i am going? leave that teapot alone." 
it was the worst course i could have taken, because it gave 
pumblechook the opportunity he wanted. 
"yes, young man," said he, releasing the handle of the article in 
question, retiring a step or two from my table, and speaking for 
the behoof of the landlord and waiter at the door, "i will leave 
that teapot alone. you are right, young man. for once, you are 
right. i forgit myself when i take such an interest in your 
breakfast, as to wish your frame, exhausted by the debilitating 
effects of prodigygality, to be stimilated by the 'olesome 
nourishment of your forefathers. and yet," said pumblechook, 
turning to the landlord and waiter, and pointing me out at arm's 
length, "this is him as i ever sported with in his days of happy 
infancy! tell me not it cannot be; i tell you this is him!" 
a low murmur from the two replied. the waiter appeared to be 
particularly affected. 
"this is him," said pumblechook, "as i have rode in my shaycart. 
this is him as i have seen brought up by hand. this is him untoe 
the sister of which i was uncle by marriage, as her name was 
georgiana m'ria from her own mother, let him deny it if he can!" 
the waiter seemed convinced that i could not deny it, and that it 
gave the case a black look. 
"young man," said pumblechook, screwing his head at me in the old 
fashion, "you air a-going to joseph. what does it matter to me, you 
ask me, where you air a-going? i say to you, sir, you air a-going 
to joseph." 
the waiter coughed, as if he modestly invited me to get over that. 
"now," said pumblechook, and all this with a most exasperating air 
of saying in the cause of virtue what was perfectly convincing and 
conclusive, "i will tell you what to say to joseph. here is squires 
of the boar present, known and respected in this town, and here is 
william, which his father's name was potkins if i do not deceive 
myself." 
"you do not, sir," said william. 
"in their presence," pursued pumblechook, "i will tell you, young 
man, what to say to joseph. says you, "joseph, i have this day seen 
my earliest benefactor and the founder of my fortun's. i will name 
no names, joseph, but so they are pleased to call him up-town, and 
i have seen that man." 
"i swear i don't see him here," said i. 
"say that likewise," retorted pumblechook. "say you said that, and 
even joseph will probably betray surprise." 
"there you quite mistake him," said i. "i know better." 
"says you," pumblechook went on, "'joseph, i have seen that man, and 
that man bears you no malice and bears me no malice. he knows your 
character, joseph, and is well acquainted with your pig-headedness 
and ignorance; and he knows my character, joseph, and he knows my 
want of gratitoode. yes, joseph,' says you," here pumblechook shook 
his head and hand at me, "'he knows my total deficiency of common 
human gratitoode. he knows it, joseph, as none can. you do not know 
it, joseph, having no call to know it, but that man do.'" 
windy donkey as he was, it really amazed me that he could have the 
face to talk thus to mine. 
"says you, 'joseph, he gave me a little message, which i will now 
repeat. it was, that in my being brought low, he saw the finger of 
providence. he knowed that finger when he saw it, joseph, and he 
saw it plain. it pinted out this writing, joseph. reward of 
ingratitoode to his earliest benefactor, and founder of fortun's. 
but that man said he did not repent of what he had done, joseph. 
not at all. it was right to do it, it was kind to do it, it was 
benevolent to do it, and he would do it again.'" 
"it's pity," said i, scornfully, as i finished my interrupted 
breakfast, "that the man did not say what he had done and would do 
again." 
"squires of the boar!" pumblechook was now addressing the landlord, 
"and william! i have no objections to your mentioning, either 
up-town or down-town, if such should be your wishes, that it was 
right to do it, kind to do it, benevolent to do it, and that i 
would do it again." 
with those words the impostor shook them both by the hand, with an 
air, and left the house; leaving me much more astonished than 
delighted by the virtues of that same indefinite "it." i was not 
long after him in leaving the house too, and when i went down the 
high-street i saw him holding forth (no doubt to the same effect) 
at his shop door to a select group, who honoured me with very 
unfavourable glances as i passed on the opposite side of the way. 
but, it was only the pleasanter to turn to biddy and to joe, whose 
great forbearance shone more brightly than before, if that could 
be, contrasted with this brazen pretender. i went towards them 
slowly, for my limbs were weak, but with a sense of increasing 
relief as i drew nearer to them, and a sense of leaving arrogance 
and untruthfulness further and further behind. 
the june weather was delicious. the sky was blue, the larks were 
soaring high over the green corn, i thought all that country-side 
more beautiful and peaceful by far than i had ever known it to be 
yet. many pleasant pictures of the life that i would lead there, 
and of the change for the better that would come over my character 
when i had a guiding spirit at my side whose simple faith and clear 
home-wisdom i had proved, beguiled my way. they awakened a tender 
emotion in me; for, my heart was softened by my return, and such a 
change had come to pass, that i felt like one who was toiling home 
barefoot from distant travel, and whose wanderings had lasted many 
years. 
the schoolhouse where biddy was mistress, i had never seen; but, 
the little roundabout lane by which i entered the village for 
quietness' sake, took me past it. i was disappointed to find that 
the day was a holiday; no children were there, and biddy's house 
was closed. some hopeful notion of seeing her busily engaged in her 
daily duties, before she saw me, had been in my mind and was 
defeated. 
but, the forge was a very short distance off, and i went towards it 
under the sweet green limes, listening for the clink of joe's 
hammer. long after i ought to have heard it, and long after i had 
fancied i heard it and found it but a fancy, all was still. the 
limes were there, and the white thorns were there, and the 
chestnut-trees were there, and their leaves rustled harmoniously 
when i stopped to listen; but, the clink of joe's hammer was not in 
the midsummer wind. 
almost fearing, without knowing why, to come in view of the forge, 
i saw it at last, and saw that it was closed. no gleam of fire, no 
glittering shower of sparks, no roar of bellows; all shut up, and 
still. 
but, the house was not deserted, and the best parlour seemed to be 
in use, for there were white curtains fluttering in its window, and 
the window was open and gay with flowers. i went softly towards it, 
meaning to peep over the flowers, when joe and biddy stood before 
me, arm in arm. 
at first biddy gave a cry, as if she thought it was my apparition, 
but in another moment she was in my embrace. i wept to see her, and 
she wept to see me; i, because she looked so fresh and pleasant; 
she, because i looked so worn and white. 
"but dear biddy, how smart you are!" 
"yes, dear pip." 
"and joe, how smart you are!" 
"yes, dear old pip, old chap." 
i looked at both of them, from one to the other, and then- 
"it's my wedding-day," cried biddy, in a burst of happiness, "and i 
am married to joe!" 
they had taken me into the kitchen, and i had laid my head down on 
the old deal table. biddy held one of my hands to her lips, and 
joe's restoring touch was on my shoulder. "which he warn't strong 
enough, my dear, fur to be surprised," said joe. and biddy said, "i 
ought to have thought of it, dear joe, but i was too happy." they 
were both so overjoyed to see me, so proud to see me, so touched by 
my coming to them, so delighted that i should have come by accident 
to make their day complete! 
my first thought was one of great thankfulness that i had never 
breathed this last baffled hope to joe. how often, while he was 
with me in my illness, had it risen to my lips. how irrevocable 
would have been his knowledge of it, if he had remained with me but 
another hour! 
"dear biddy," said i, "you have the best husband in the whole 
world, and if you could have seen him by my bed you would have - 
but no, you couldn't love him better than you do." 
"no, i couldn't indeed," said biddy. 
"and, dear joe, you have the best wife in the whole world, and she 
will make you as happy as even you deserve to be, you dear, good, 
noble joe!" 
joe looked at me with a quivering lip, and fairly put his sleeve 
before his eyes. 
"and joe and biddy both, as you have been to church to-day, and are 
in charity and love with all mankind, receive my humble thanks for 
all you have done for me and all i have so ill repaid! and when i 
say that i am going away within the hour, for i am soon going 
abroad, and that i shall never rest until i have worked for the 
money with which you have kept me out of prison, and have sent it 
to you, don't think, dear joe and biddy, that if i could repay it a 
thousand times over, i suppose i could cancel a farthing of the 
debt i owe you, or that i would do so if i could!" 
they were both melted by these words, and both entreated me to say 
no more. 
"but i must say more. dear joe, i hope you will have children to 
love, and that some little fellow will sit in this chimney corner 
of a winter night, who may remind you of another little fellow gone 
out of it for ever. don't tell him, joe, that i was thankless; 
don't tell him, biddy, that i was ungenerous and unjust; only tell 
him that i honoured you both, because you were both so good and 
true, and that, as your child, i said it would be natural to him to 
grow up a much better man than i did." 
"i ain't a-going," said joe, from behind his sleeve, "to tell him 
nothink o' that natur, pip. nor biddy ain't. nor yet no one ain't." 
"and now, though i know you have already done it in your own kind 
hearts, pray tell me, both, that you forgive me! pray let me hear 
you say the words, that i may carry the sound of them away with me, 
and then i shall be able to believe that you can trust me, and 
think better of me, in the time to come!" 
"o dear old pip, old chap," said joe. "god knows as i forgive you, 
if i have anythink to forgive!" 
"amen! and god knows i do!" echoed biddy. 
"now let me go up and look at my old little room, and rest there a 
few minutes by myself, and then when i have eaten and drunk with you, 
go with me as far as the finger-post, dear joe and biddy, before we 
say good-bye!" 
i sold all i had, and put aside as much as i could, for a 
composition with my creditors - who gave me ample time to pay them 
in full - and i went out and joined herbert. within a month, i had 
quitted england, and within two months i was clerk to clarriker and 
co., and within four months i assumed my first undivided 
responsibility. for, the beam across the parlour ceiling at mill 
pond bank, had then ceased to tremble under old bill barley's 
growls and was at peace, and herbert had gone away to marry clara, 
and i was left in sole charge of the eastern branch until he 
brought her back. 
many a year went round, before i was a partner in the house; but, 
i lived happily with herbert and his wife, and lived frugally, and 
paid my debts, and maintained a constant correspondence with biddy 
and joe. it was not until i became third in the firm, that 
clarriker betrayed me to herbert; but, he then declared that the 
secret of herbert's partnership had been long enough upon his 
conscience, and he must tell it. so, he told it, and herbert was as 
much moved as amazed, and the dear fellow and i were not the worse 
friends for the long concealment. i must not leave it to be 
supposed that we were ever a great house, or that we made mints of 
money. we were not in a grand way of business, but we had a good 
name, and worked for our profits, and did very well. we owed so 
much to herbert's ever cheerful industry and readiness, that i 
often wondered how i had conceived that old idea of his inaptitude, 
until i was one day enlightened by the reflection, that perhaps the 
inaptitude had never been in him at all, but had been in me. 
chapter 59 
for eleven years, i had not seen joe nor biddy with my bodily 
eyes-though they had both been often before my fancy in the 
east-when, upon an evening in december, an hour or two after dark, 
i laid my hand softly on the latch of the old kitchen door. i 
touched it so softly that i was not heard, and looked in unseen. 
there, smoking his pipe in the old place by the kitchen firelight, 
as hale and as strong as ever though a little grey, sat joe; and 
there, fenced into the corner with joe's leg, and sitting on my own 
little stool looking at the fire, was - i again! 
"we giv' him the name of pip for your sake, dear old chap," said 
joe, delighted when i took another stool by the child's side (but i 
did not rumple his hair), "and we hoped he might grow a little bit 
like you, and we think he do." 
i thought so too, and i took him out for a walk next morning, and 
we talked immensely, understanding one another to perfection. and i 
took him down to the churchyard, and set him on a certain tombstone 
there, and he showed me from that elevation which stone was sacred 
to the memory of philip pirrip, late of this parish, and also 
georgiana, wife of the above. 
"biddy," said i, when i talked with her after dinner, as her little 
girl lay sleeping in her lap, "you must give pip to me, one of 
these days; or lend him, at all events." 
"no, no," said biddy, gently. "you must marry." 
"so herbert and clara say, but i don't think i shall, biddy. i have 
so settled down in their home, that it's not at all likely. i am 
already quite an old bachelor." 
biddy looked down at her child, and put its little hand to her 
lips, and then put the good matronly hand with which she had 
touched it, into mine. there was something in the action and in the 
light pressure of biddy's wedding-ring, that had a very pretty 
eloquence in it. 
"dear pip," said biddy, "you are sure you don't fret for her?" 
"o no - i think not, biddy." 
"tell me as an old, old friend. have you quite forgotten her? 
"my dear biddy, i have forgotten nothing in my life that ever had a 
foremost place there, and little that ever had any place there. but 
that poor dream, as i once used to call it, has all gone by, biddy, 
all gone by!" 
nevertheless, i knew while i said those words, that i secretly 
intended to revisit the site of the old house that evening, alone, 
for her sake. yes even so. for estella's sake. 
i had heard of her as leading a most unhappy life, and as being 
separated from her husband, who had used her with great cruelty, 
and who had become quite renowned as a compound of pride, avarice, 
brutality, and meanness. and i had heard of the death of her 
husband, from an accident consequent on his ill-treatment of a 
horse. this release had befallen her some two years before; for 
anything i knew, she was married again. 
the early dinner-hour at joe's, left me abundance of time, without 
hurrying my talk with biddy, to walk over to the old spot before 
dark. but, what with loitering on the way, to look at old objects 
and to think of old times, the day had quite declined when i came 
to the place. 
there was no house now, no brewery, no building whatever left, but 
the wall of the old garden. the cleared space had been enclosed 
with a rough fence, and, looking over it, i saw that some of the 
old ivy had struck root anew, and was growing green on low quiet 
mounds of ruin. a gate in the fence standing ajar, i pushed it 
open, and went in. 
a cold silvery mist had veiled the afternoon, and the moon was not 
yet up to scatter it. but, the stars were shining beyond the mist, 
and the moon was coming, and the evening was not dark. i could 
trace out where every part of the old house had been, and where the 
brewery had been, and where the gate, and where the casks. i had 
done so, and was looking along the desolate gardenwalk, when i 
beheld a solitary figure in it. 
the figure showed itself aware of me, as i advanced. it had been 
moving towards me, but it stood still. as i drew nearer, i saw it 
to be the figure of a woman. as i drew nearer yet, it was about to 
turn away, when it stopped, and let me come up with it. then, it 
faltered as if much surprised, and uttered my name, and i cried 
out: 
"estella!" 
"i am greatly changed. i wonder you know me." 
the freshness of her beauty was indeed gone, but its indescribable 
majesty and its indescribable charm remained. those attractions in 
it, i had seen before; what i had never seen before, was the 
saddened softened light of the once proud eyes; what i had never 
felt before, was the friendly touch of the once insensible hand. 
we sat down on a bench that was near, and i said, "after so many 
years, it is strange that we should thus meet again, estella, here 
where our first meeting was! do you often come back?" 
"i have never been here since." 
"nor i." 
the moon began to rise, and i thought of the placid look at the 
white ceiling, which had passed away. the moon began to rise, and i 
thought of the pressure on my hand when i had spoken the last words 
he had heard on earth. 
estella was the next to break the silence that ensued between us. 
"i have very often hoped and intended to come back, but have been 
prevented by many circumstances. poor, poor old place!" 
the silvery mist was touched with the first rays of the moonlight, 
and the same rays touched the tears that dropped from her eyes. not 
knowing that i saw them, and setting herself to get the better of 
them, she said quietly: 
"were you wondering, as you walked along, how it came to be left in 
this condition?" 
"yes, estella." 
"the ground belongs to me. it is the only possession i have not 
relinquished. everything else has gone from me, little by little, 
but i have kept this. it was the subject of the only determined 
resistance i made in all the wretched years." 
"is it to be built on?" 
"at last it is. i came here to take leave of it before its change. 
and you," she said, in a voice of touching interest to a wanderer, 
"you live abroad still?" 
"still." 
"and do well, i am sure?" 
"i work pretty hard for a sufficient living, and therefore - yes, i 
do well." 
"i have often thought of you," said estella. 
"have you?" 
"of late, very often. there was a long hard time when i kept far 
from me, the remembrance, of what i had thrown away when i was 
quite ignorant of its worth. but, since my duty has not been 
incompatible with the admission of that remembrance, i have given 
it a place in my heart." 
"you have always held your place in my heart," i answered. 
and we were silent again, until she spoke. 
"i little thought," said estella, "that i should take leave of you 
in taking leave of this spot. i am very glad to do so." 
"glad to part again, estella? to me, parting is a painful thing. to 
me, the remembrance of our last parting has been ever mournful and 
painful." 
"but you said to me," returned estella, very earnestly, "'god bless 
you, god forgive you!' and if you could say that to me then, you 
will not hesitate to say that to me now - now, when suffering has 
been stronger than all other teaching, and has taught me to 
understand what your heart used to be. i have been bent and broken, 
but - i hope - into a better shape. be as considerate and good to 
me as you were, and tell me we are friends." 
"we are friends," said i, rising and bending over her, as she rose 
from the bench. 
"and will continue friends apart," said estella. 
i took her hand in mine, and we went out of the ruined place; and, 
as the morning mists had risen long ago when i first left the 
forge, so, the evening mists were rising now, and in all the broad 
expanse of tranquil light they showed to me, i saw no shadow of 
another parting from her. 
end of the project gutenberg etext of great expectations, by dickens 
the project gutenberg ebook of the adventures of huckleberry finn, complete 
by mark twain (samuel clemens) 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 
title: the adventures of huckleberry finn, complete 
author: mark twain (samuel clemens) 
release date: august 20, 2006 [ebook #76] 
language: english 
character set encoding: ascii 
*** start of this project gutenberg ebook huckleberry finn *** 
produced by david widger. previous editions produced by ron burkey 
and internet wiretap 
huckleberry finn 
by mark twain 
notice 
persons attempting to find a motive in this narrative will be prosecuted; 
persons attempting to find a moral in it will be banished; persons 
attempting to find a plot in it will be shot. 
by order of the author, per g.g., chief of ordnance. 
explanatory 
in this book a number of dialects are used, to wit: the missouri negro 
dialect; the extremest form of the backwoods southwestern dialect; the 
ordinary "pike county" dialect; and four modified varieties of this last. 
the shadings have not been done in a haphazard fashion, or by guesswork; 
but painstakingly, and with the trustworthy guidance and support of 
personal familiarity with these several forms of speech. 
i make this explanation for the reason that without it many readers would 
suppose that all these characters were trying to talk alike and not 
succeeding. 
the author. 
huckleberry finn 
scene: the mississippi valley time: forty to fifty years ago 
chapter i. 
you don't know about me without you have read a book by the name of the 
adventures of tom sawyer; but that ain't no matter. that book was made 
by mr. mark twain, and he told the truth, mainly. there was things which 
he stretched, but mainly he told the truth. that is nothing. i never 
seen anybody but lied one time or another, without it was aunt polly, or 
the widow, or maybe mary. aunt polly-tom's aunt polly, she is-and 
mary, and the widow douglas is all told about in that book, which is 
mostly a true book, with some stretchers, as i said before. 
now the way that the book winds up is this: tom and me found the money 
that the robbers hid in the cave, and it made us rich. we got six 
thousand dollars apiece-all gold. it was an awful sight of money when 
it was piled up. well, judge thatcher he took it and put it out at 
interest, and it fetched us a dollar a day apiece all the year round 
more than a body could tell what to do with. the widow douglas she took 
me for her son, and allowed she would sivilize me; but it was rough 
living in the house all the time, considering how dismal regular and 
decent the widow was in all her ways; and so when i couldn't stand it no 
longer i lit out. i got into my old rags and my sugar-hogshead again, 
and was free and satisfied. but tom sawyer he hunted me up and said he 
was going to start a band of robbers, and i might join if i would go back 
to the widow and be respectable. so i went back. 
the widow she cried over me, and called me a poor lost lamb, and she 
called me a lot of other names, too, but she never meant no harm by it. 
she put me in them new clothes again, and i couldn't do nothing but sweat 
and sweat, and feel all cramped up. well, then, the old thing commenced 
again. the widow rung a bell for supper, and you had to come to time. 
when you got to the table you couldn't go right to eating, but you had to 
wait for the widow to tuck down her head and grumble a little over the 
victuals, though there warn't really anything the matter with them,-that 
is, nothing only everything was cooked by itself. in a barrel of odds 
and ends it is different; things get mixed up, and the juice kind of 
swaps around, and the things go better. 
after supper she got out her book and learned me about moses and the 
bulrushers, and i was in a sweat to find out all about him; but by and by 
she let it out that moses had been dead a considerable long time; so then 
i didn't care no more about him, because i don't take no stock in dead 
people. 
pretty soon i wanted to smoke, and asked the widow to let me. but she 
wouldn't. she said it was a mean practice and wasn't clean, and i must 
try to not do it any more. that is just the way with some people. they 
get down on a thing when they don't know nothing about it. here she was 
a-bothering about moses, which was no kin to her, and no use to anybody, 
being gone, you see, yet finding a power of fault with me for doing a 
thing that had some good in it. and she took snuff, too; of course that 
was all right, because she done it herself. 
her sister, miss watson, a tolerable slim old maid, with goggles on, 
had just come to live with her, and took a set at me now with a 
spelling-book. she worked me middling hard for about an hour, and then 
the widow made her ease up. i couldn't stood it much longer. then for 
an hour it was deadly dull, and i was fidgety. miss watson would say, 
"don't put your feet up there, huckleberry;" and "don't scrunch up like 
that, huckleberry-set up straight;" and pretty soon she would say, 
"don't gap and stretch like that, huckleberry-why don't you try to 
behave?" then she told me all about the bad place, and i said i wished i 
was there. she got mad then, but i didn't mean no harm. all i wanted was 
to go somewheres; all i wanted was a change, i warn't particular. she 
said it was wicked to say what i said; said she wouldn't say it for the 
whole world; she was going to live so as to go to the good place. well, 
i couldn't see no advantage in going where she was going, so i made up my 
mind i wouldn't try for it. but i never said so, because it would only 
make trouble, and wouldn't do no good. 
now she had got a start, and she went on and told me all about the good 
place. she said all a body would have to do there was to go around all 
day long with a harp and sing, forever and ever. so i didn't think much 
of it. but i never said so. i asked her if she reckoned tom sawyer would 
go there, and she said not by a considerable sight. i was glad about 
that, because i wanted him and me to be together. 
miss watson she kept pecking at me, and it got tiresome and lonesome. by 
and by they fetched the niggers in and had prayers, and then everybody 
was off to bed. i went up to my room with a piece of candle, and put it 
on the table. then i set down in a chair by the window and tried to 
think of something cheerful, but it warn't no use. i felt so lonesome i 
most wished i was dead. the stars were shining, and the leaves rustled 
in the woods ever so mournful; and i heard an owl, away off, who-whooing 
about somebody that was dead, and a whippowill and a dog crying about 
somebody that was going to die; and the wind was trying to whisper 
something to me, and i couldn't make out what it was, and so it made the 
cold shivers run over me. then away out in the woods i heard that kind of 
a sound that a ghost makes when it wants to tell about something that's 
on its mind and can't make itself understood, and so can't rest easy in 
its grave, and has to go about that way every night grieving. i got so 
down-hearted and scared i did wish i had some company. pretty soon a 
spider went crawling up my shoulder, and i flipped it off and it lit in 
the candle; and before i could budge it was all shriveled up. i didn't 
need anybody to tell me that that was an awful bad sign and would fetch 
me some bad luck, so i was scared and most shook the clothes off of me. 
i got up and turned around in my tracks three times and crossed my breast 
every time; and then i tied up a little lock of my hair with a thread to 
keep witches away. but i hadn't no confidence. you do that when you've 
lost a horseshoe that you've found, instead of nailing it up over the 
door, but i hadn't ever heard anybody say it was any way to keep off bad 
luck when you'd killed a spider. 
i set down again, a-shaking all over, and got out my pipe for a smoke; 
for the house was all as still as death now, and so the widow wouldn't 
know. well, after a long time i heard the clock away off in the town go 
boom-boom-boom-twelve licks; and all still again-stiller than ever. 
pretty soon i heard a twig snap down in the dark amongst the trees 
something was a stirring. i set still and listened. directly i could 
just barely hear a "me-yow! me-yow!" down there. that was good! says i, 
"me-yow! me-yow!" as soft as i could, and then i put out the light and 
scrambled out of the window on to the shed. then i slipped down to the 
ground and crawled in among the trees, and, sure enough, there was tom 
sawyer waiting for me. 
chapter ii. 
we went tiptoeing along a path amongst the trees back towards the end of 
the widow's garden, stooping down so as the branches wouldn't scrape our 
heads. when we was passing by the kitchen i fell over a root and made a 
noise. we scrouched down and laid still. miss watson's big nigger, 
named jim, was setting in the kitchen door; we could see him pretty 
clear, because there was a light behind him. he got up and stretched his 
neck out about a minute, listening. then he says: 
"who dah?" 
he listened some more; then he come tiptoeing down and stood right 
between us; we could a touched him, nearly. well, likely it was minutes 
and minutes that there warn't a sound, and we all there so close 
together. there was a place on my ankle that got to itching, but i 
dasn't scratch it; and then my ear begun to itch; and next my back, right 
between my shoulders. seemed like i'd die if i couldn't scratch. well, 
i've noticed that thing plenty times since. if you are with the quality, 
or at a funeral, or trying to go to sleep when you ain't sleepy-if you 
are anywheres where it won't do for you to scratch, why you will itch all 
over in upwards of a thousand places. pretty soon jim says: 
"say, who is you? whar is you? dog my cats ef i didn' hear sumf'n. 
well, i know what i's gwyne to do: i's gwyne to set down here and listen 
tell i hears it agin." 
so he set down on the ground betwixt me and tom. he leaned his back up 
against a tree, and stretched his legs out till one of them most touched 
one of mine. my nose begun to itch. it itched till the tears come into 
my eyes. but i dasn't scratch. then it begun to itch on the inside. 
next i got to itching underneath. i didn't know how i was going to set 
still. this miserableness went on as much as six or seven minutes; but it 
seemed a sight longer than that. i was itching in eleven different 
places now. i reckoned i couldn't stand it more'n a minute longer, but i 
set my teeth hard and got ready to try. just then jim begun to breathe 
heavy; next he begun to snore-and then i was pretty soon comfortable 
again. 
tom he made a sign to me-kind of a little noise with his mouth-and we 
went creeping away on our hands and knees. when we was ten foot off tom 
whispered to me, and wanted to tie jim to the tree for fun. but i said 
no; he might wake and make a disturbance, and then they'd find out i 
warn't in. then tom said he hadn't got candles enough, and he would slip 
in the kitchen and get some more. i didn't want him to try. i said jim 
might wake up and come. but tom wanted to resk it; so we slid in there 
and got three candles, and tom laid five cents on the table for pay. 
then we got out, and i was in a sweat to get away; but nothing would do 
tom but he must crawl to where jim was, on his hands and knees, and play 
something on him. i waited, and it seemed a good while, everything was 
so still and lonesome. 
as soon as tom was back we cut along the path, around the garden fence, 
and by and by fetched up on the steep top of the hill the other side of 
the house. tom said he slipped jim's hat off of his head and hung it on 
a limb right over him, and jim stirred a little, but he didn't wake. 
afterwards jim said the witches be witched him and put him in a trance, 
and rode him all over the state, and then set him under the trees again, 
and hung his hat on a limb to show who done it. and next time jim told 
it he said they rode him down to new orleans; and, after that, every time 
he told it he spread it more and more, till by and by he said they rode 
him all over the world, and tired him most to death, and his back was all 
over saddle-boils. jim was monstrous proud about it, and he got so he 
wouldn't hardly notice the other niggers. niggers would come miles to 
hear jim tell about it, and he was more looked up to than any nigger in 
that country. strange niggers would stand with their mouths open and 
look him all over, same as if he was a wonder. niggers is always talking 
about witches in the dark by the kitchen fire; but whenever one was 
talking and letting on to know all about such things, jim would happen in 
and say, "hm! what you know 'bout witches?" and that nigger was corked 
up and had to take a back seat. jim always kept that five-center piece 
round his neck with a string, and said it was a charm the devil give to 
him with his own hands, and told him he could cure anybody with it and 
fetch witches whenever he wanted to just by saying something to it; but 
he never told what it was he said to it. niggers would come from all 
around there and give jim anything they had, just for a sight of that 
five-center piece; but they wouldn't touch it, because the devil had had 
his hands on it. jim was most ruined for a servant, because he got stuck 
up on account of having seen the devil and been rode by witches. 
well, when tom and me got to the edge of the hilltop we looked away down 
into the village and could see three or four lights twinkling, where 
there was sick folks, maybe; and the stars over us was sparkling ever so 
fine; and down by the village was the river, a whole mile broad, and 
awful still and grand. we went down the hill and found jo harper and ben 
rogers, and two or three more of the boys, hid in the old tanyard. so we 
unhitched a skiff and pulled down the river two mile and a half, to the 
big scar on the hillside, and went ashore. 
we went to a clump of bushes, and tom made everybody swear to keep the 
secret, and then showed them a hole in the hill, right in the thickest 
part of the bushes. then we lit the candles, and crawled in on our hands 
and knees. we went about two hundred yards, and then the cave opened up. 
tom poked about amongst the passages, and pretty soon ducked under a wall 
where you wouldn't a noticed that there was a hole. we went along a 
narrow place and got into a kind of room, all damp and sweaty and cold, 
and there we stopped. tom says: 
"now, we'll start this band of robbers and call it tom sawyer's gang. 
everybody that wants to join has got to take an oath, and write his name 
in blood." 
everybody was willing. so tom got out a sheet of paper that he had wrote 
the oath on, and read it. it swore every boy to stick to the band, and 
never tell any of the secrets; and if anybody done anything to any boy in 
the band, whichever boy was ordered to kill that person and his family 
must do it, and he mustn't eat and he mustn't sleep till he had killed 
them and hacked a cross in their breasts, which was the sign of the band. 
and nobody that didn't belong to the band could use that mark, and if he 
did he must be sued; and if he done it again he must be killed. and if 
anybody that belonged to the band told the secrets, he must have his 
throat cut, and then have his carcass burnt up and the ashes scattered 
all around, and his name blotted off of the list with blood and never 
mentioned again by the gang, but have a curse put on it and be forgot 
forever. 
everybody said it was a real beautiful oath, and asked tom if he got it 
out of his own head. he said, some of it, but the rest was out of 
pirate-books and robber-books, and every gang that was high-toned had it. 
some thought it would be good to kill the families of boys that told the 
secrets. tom said it was a good idea, so he took a pencil and wrote it 
in. then ben rogers says: 
"here's huck finn, he hain't got no family; what you going to do 'bout 
him?" 
"well, hain't he got a father?" says tom sawyer. 
"yes, he's got a father, but you can't never find him these days. he 
used to lay drunk with the hogs in the tanyard, but he hain't been seen 
in these parts for a year or more." 
they talked it over, and they was going to rule me out, because they said 
every boy must have a family or somebody to kill, or else it wouldn't be 
fair and square for the others. well, nobody could think of anything to 
do-everybody was stumped, and set still. i was most ready to cry; but 
all at once i thought of a way, and so i offered them miss watson-they 
could kill her. everybody said: 
"oh, she'll do. that's all right. huck can come in." 
then they all stuck a pin in their fingers to get blood to sign with, and 
i made my mark on the paper. 
"now," says ben rogers, "what's the line of business of this gang?" 
"nothing only robbery and murder," tom said. 
"but who are we going to rob?-houses, or cattle, or-" 
"stuff! stealing cattle and such things ain't robbery; it's burglary," 
says tom sawyer. "we ain't burglars. that ain't no sort of style. we 
are highwaymen. we stop stages and carriages on the road, with masks on, 
and kill the people and take their watches and money." 
"must we always kill the people?" 
"oh, certainly. it's best. some authorities think different, but mostly 
it's considered best to kill them-except some that you bring to the cave 
here, and keep them till they're ransomed." 
"ransomed? what's that?" 
"i don't know. but that's what they do. i've seen it in books; and so 
of course that's what we've got to do." 
"but how can we do it if we don't know what it is?" 
"why, blame it all, we've got to do it. don't i tell you it's in the 
books? do you want to go to doing different from what's in the books, 
and get things all muddled up?" 
"oh, that's all very fine to say, tom sawyer, but how in the nation are 
these fellows going to be ransomed if we don't know how to do it to them? 
that's the thing i want to get at. now, what do you reckon it is?" 
"well, i don't know. but per'aps if we keep them till they're ransomed, 
it means that we keep them till they're dead." 
"now, that's something like. that'll answer. why couldn't you said that 
before? we'll keep them till they're ransomed to death; and a bothersome 
lot they'll be, too-eating up everything, and always trying to get 
loose." 
"how you talk, ben rogers. how can they get loose when there's a guard 
over them, ready to shoot them down if they move a peg?" 
"a guard! well, that is good. so somebody's got to set up all night and 
never get any sleep, just so as to watch them. i think that's 
foolishness. why can't a body take a club and ransom them as soon as they 
get here?" 
"because it ain't in the books so-that's why. now, ben rogers, do you 
want to do things regular, or don't you?-that's the idea. don't you 
reckon that the people that made the books knows what's the correct thing 
to do? do you reckon you can learn 'em anything? not by a good deal. 
no, sir, we'll just go on and ransom them in the regular way." 
"all right. i don't mind; but i say it's a fool way, anyhow. say, do we 
kill the women, too?" 
"well, ben rogers, if i was as ignorant as you i wouldn't let on. kill 
the women? no; nobody ever saw anything in the books like that. you 
fetch them to the cave, and you're always as polite as pie to them; and 
by and by they fall in love with you, and never want to go home any 
more." 
"well, if that's the way i'm agreed, but i don't take no stock in it. 
mighty soon we'll have the cave so cluttered up with women, and fellows 
waiting to be ransomed, that there won't be no place for the robbers. 
but go ahead, i ain't got nothing to say." 
little tommy barnes was asleep now, and when they waked him up he was 
scared, and cried, and said he wanted to go home to his ma, and didn't 
want to be a robber any more. 
so they all made fun of him, and called him cry-baby, and that made him 
mad, and he said he would go straight and tell all the secrets. but tom 
give him five cents to keep quiet, and said we would all go home and meet 
next week, and rob somebody and kill some people. 
ben rogers said he couldn't get out much, only sundays, and so he wanted 
to begin next sunday; but all the boys said it would be wicked to do it 
on sunday, and that settled the thing. they agreed to get together and 
fix a day as soon as they could, and then we elected tom sawyer first 
captain and jo harper second captain of the gang, and so started home. 
i clumb up the shed and crept into my window just before day was 
breaking. my new clothes was all greased up and clayey, and i was 
dog-tired. 
chapter iii. 
well, i got a good going-over in the morning from old miss watson on 
account of my clothes; but the widow she didn't scold, but only cleaned 
off the grease and clay, and looked so sorry that i thought i would 
behave awhile if i could. then miss watson she took me in the closet and 
prayed, but nothing come of it. she told me to pray every day, and 
whatever i asked for i would get it. but it warn't so. i tried it. 
once i got a fish-line, but no hooks. it warn't any good to me without 
hooks. i tried for the hooks three or four times, but somehow i couldn't 
make it work. by and by, one day, i asked miss watson to try for me, but 
she said i was a fool. she never told me why, and i couldn't make it out 
no way. 
i set down one time back in the woods, and had a long think about it. i 
says to myself, if a body can get anything they pray for, why don't 
deacon winn get back the money he lost on pork? why can't the widow get 
back her silver snuffbox that was stole? why can't miss watson fat up? 
no, says i to my self, there ain't nothing in it. i went and told the 
widow about it, and she said the thing a body could get by praying for it 
was "spiritual gifts." this was too many for me, but she told me what 
she meant-i must help other people, and do everything i could for other 
people, and look out for them all the time, and never think about myself. 
this was including miss watson, as i took it. i went out in the woods 
and turned it over in my mind a long time, but i couldn't see no 
advantage about it-except for the other people; so at last i reckoned i 
wouldn't worry about it any more, but just let it go. sometimes the 
widow would take me one side and talk about providence in a way to make a 
body's mouth water; but maybe next day miss watson would take hold and 
knock it all down again. i judged i could see that there was two 
providences, and a poor chap would stand considerable show with the 
widow's providence, but if miss watson's got him there warn't no help for 
him any more. i thought it all out, and reckoned i would belong to the 
widow's if he wanted me, though i couldn't make out how he was a-going to 
be any better off then than what he was before, seeing i was so ignorant, 
and so kind of low-down and ornery. 
pap he hadn't been seen for more than a year, and that was comfortable 
for me; i didn't want to see him no more. he used to always whale me 
when he was sober and could get his hands on me; though i used to take to 
the woods most of the time when he was around. well, about this time he 
was found in the river drownded, about twelve mile above town, so people 
said. they judged it was him, anyway; said this drownded man was just 
his size, and was ragged, and had uncommon long hair, which was all like 
pap; but they couldn't make nothing out of the face, because it had been 
in the water so long it warn't much like a face at all. they said he was 
floating on his back in the water. they took him and buried him on the 
bank. but i warn't comfortable long, because i happened to think of 
something. i knowed mighty well that a drownded man don't float on his 
back, but on his face. so i knowed, then, that this warn't pap, but a 
woman dressed up in a man's clothes. so i was uncomfortable again. i 
judged the old man would turn up again by and by, though i wished he 
wouldn't. 
we played robber now and then about a month, and then i resigned. all 
the boys did. we hadn't robbed nobody, hadn't killed any people, but 
only just pretended. we used to hop out of the woods and go charging 
down on hog-drivers and women in carts taking garden stuff to market, but 
we never hived any of them. tom sawyer called the hogs "ingots," and he 
called the turnips and stuff "julery," and we would go to the cave and 
powwow over what we had done, and how many people we had killed and 
marked. but i couldn't see no profit in it. one time tom sent a boy to 
run about town with a blazing stick, which he called a slogan (which was 
the sign for the gang to get together), and then he said he had got 
secret news by his spies that next day a whole parcel of spanish 
merchants and rich a-rabs was going to camp in cave hollow with two 
hundred elephants, and six hundred camels, and over a thousand "sumter" 
mules, all loaded down with di'monds, and they didn't have only a guard 
of four hundred soldiers, and so we would lay in ambuscade, as he called 
it, and kill the lot and scoop the things. he said we must slick up our 
swords and guns, and get ready. he never could go after even a 
turnip-cart but he must have the swords and guns all scoured up for it, 
though they was only lath and broomsticks, and you might scour at them 
till you rotted, and then they warn't worth a mouthful of ashes more than 
what they was before. i didn't believe we could lick such a crowd of 
spaniards and a-rabs, but i wanted to see the camels and elephants, so i 
was on hand next day, saturday, in the ambuscade; and when we got the 
word we rushed out of the woods and down the hill. but there warn't no 
spaniards and a-rabs, and there warn't no camels nor no elephants. it 
warn't anything but a sunday-school picnic, and only a primer-class at 
that. we busted it up, and chased the children up the hollow; but we 
never got anything but some doughnuts and jam, though ben rogers got a 
rag doll, and jo harper got a hymn-book and a tract; and then the teacher 
charged in, and made us drop everything and cut. i didn't see no 
di'monds, and i told tom sawyer so. he said there was loads of them 
there, anyway; and he said there was a-rabs there, too, and elephants and 
things. i said, why couldn't we see them, then? he said if i warn't so 
ignorant, but had read a book called don quixote, i would know without 
asking. he said it was all done by enchantment. he said there was 
hundreds of soldiers there, and elephants and treasure, and so on, but we 
had enemies which he called magicians; and they had turned the whole 
thing into an infant sunday-school, just out of spite. i said, all 
right; then the thing for us to do was to go for the magicians. tom 
sawyer said i was a numskull. 
"why," said he, "a magician could call up a lot of genies, and they would 
hash you up like nothing before you could say jack robinson. they are as 
tall as a tree and as big around as a church." 
"well," i says, "s'pose we got some genies to help us-can't we lick the 
other crowd then?" 
"how you going to get them?" 
"i don't know. how do they get them?" 
"why, they rub an old tin lamp or an iron ring, and then the genies come 
tearing in, with the thunder and lightning a-ripping around and the smoke 
a-rolling, and everything they're told to do they up and do it. they 
don't think nothing of pulling a shot-tower up by the roots, and belting 
a sunday-school superintendent over the head with it-or any other man." 
"who makes them tear around so?" 
"why, whoever rubs the lamp or the ring. they belong to whoever rubs the 
lamp or the ring, and they've got to do whatever he says. if he tells 
them to build a palace forty miles long out of di'monds, and fill it full 
of chewing-gum, or whatever you want, and fetch an emperor's daughter 
from china for you to marry, they've got to do it-and they've got to do 
it before sun-up next morning, too. and more: they've got to waltz that 
palace around over the country wherever you want it, you understand." 
"well," says i, "i think they are a pack of flat-heads for not keeping 
the palace themselves 'stead of fooling them away like that. and what's 
more-if i was one of them i would see a man in jericho before i would 
drop my business and come to him for the rubbing of an old tin lamp." 
"how you talk, huck finn. why, you'd have to come when he rubbed it, 
whether you wanted to or not." 
"what! and i as high as a tree and as big as a church? all right, then; 
i would come; but i lay i'd make that man climb the highest tree there 
was in the country." 
"shucks, it ain't no use to talk to you, huck finn. you don't seem to 
know anything, somehow-perfect saphead." 
i thought all this over for two or three days, and then i reckoned i 
would see if there was anything in it. i got an old tin lamp and an iron 
ring, and went out in the woods and rubbed and rubbed till i sweat like 
an injun, calculating to build a palace and sell it; but it warn't no 
use, none of the genies come. so then i judged that all that stuff was 
only just one of tom sawyer's lies. i reckoned he believed in the a-rabs 
and the elephants, but as for me i think different. it had all the marks 
of a sunday-school. 
chapter iv. 
well, three or four months run along, and it was well into the winter 
now. i had been to school most all the time and could spell and read and 
write just a little, and could say the multiplication table up to six 
times seven is thirty-five, and i don't reckon i could ever get any 
further than that if i was to live forever. i don't take no stock in 
mathematics, anyway. 
at first i hated the school, but by and by i got so i could stand it. 
whenever i got uncommon tired i played hookey, and the hiding i got next 
day done me good and cheered me up. so the longer i went to school the 
easier it got to be. i was getting sort of used to the widow's ways, 
too, and they warn't so raspy on me. living in a house and sleeping in a 
bed pulled on me pretty tight mostly, but before the cold weather i used 
to slide out and sleep in the woods sometimes, and so that was a rest to 
me. i liked the old ways best, but i was getting so i liked the new 
ones, too, a little bit. the widow said i was coming along slow but sure, 
and doing very satisfactory. she said she warn't ashamed of me. 
one morning i happened to turn over the salt-cellar at breakfast. i 
reached for some of it as quick as i could to throw over my left shoulder 
and keep off the bad luck, but miss watson was in ahead of me, and 
crossed me off. she says, "take your hands away, huckleberry; what a mess 
you are always making!" the widow put in a good word for me, but that 
warn't going to keep off the bad luck, i knowed that well enough. i 
started out, after breakfast, feeling worried and shaky, and wondering 
where it was going to fall on me, and what it was going to be. there is 
ways to keep off some kinds of bad luck, but this wasn't one of them 
kind; so i never tried to do anything, but just poked along low-spirited 
and on the watch-out. 
i went down to the front garden and clumb over the stile where you go 
through the high board fence. there was an inch of new snow on the 
ground, and i seen somebody's tracks. they had come up from the quarry 
and stood around the stile a while, and then went on around the garden 
fence. it was funny they hadn't come in, after standing around so. i 
couldn't make it out. it was very curious, somehow. i was going to 
follow around, but i stooped down to look at the tracks first. i didn't 
notice anything at first, but next i did. there was a cross in the left 
boot-heel made with big nails, to keep off the devil. 
i was up in a second and shinning down the hill. i looked over my 
shoulder every now and then, but i didn't see nobody. i was at judge 
thatcher's as quick as i could get there. he said: 
"why, my boy, you are all out of breath. did you come for your 
interest?" 
"no, sir," i says; "is there some for me?" 
"oh, yes, a half-yearly is in last night-over a hundred and fifty 
dollars. quite a fortune for you. you had better let me invest it along 
with your six thousand, because if you take it you'll spend it." 
"no, sir," i says, "i don't want to spend it. i don't want it at all 
nor the six thousand, nuther. i want you to take it; i want to give it 
to you-the six thousand and all." 
he looked surprised. he couldn't seem to make it out. he says: 
"why, what can you mean, my boy?" 
i says, "don't you ask me no questions about it, please. you'll take it 
won't you?" 
he says: 
"well, i'm puzzled. is something the matter?" 
"please take it," says i, "and don't ask me nothing-then i won't have to 
tell no lies." 
he studied a while, and then he says: 
"oho-o! i think i see. you want to sell all your property to me-not 
give it. that's the correct idea." 
then he wrote something on a paper and read it over, and says: 
"there; you see it says 'for a consideration.' that means i have bought 
it of you and paid you for it. here's a dollar for you. now you sign 
it." 
so i signed it, and left. 
miss watson's nigger, jim, had a hair-ball as big as your fist, which had 
been took out of the fourth stomach of an ox, and he used to do magic 
with it. he said there was a spirit inside of it, and it knowed 
everything. so i went to him that night and told him pap was here again, 
for i found his tracks in the snow. what i wanted to know was, what he 
was going to do, and was he going to stay? jim got out his hair-ball and 
said something over it, and then he held it up and dropped it on the 
floor. it fell pretty solid, and only rolled about an inch. jim tried 
it again, and then another time, and it acted just the same. jim got 
down on his knees, and put his ear against it and listened. but it 
warn't no use; he said it wouldn't talk. he said sometimes it wouldn't 
talk without money. i told him i had an old slick counterfeit quarter 
that warn't no good because the brass showed through the silver a little, 
and it wouldn't pass nohow, even if the brass didn't show, because it was 
so slick it felt greasy, and so that would tell on it every time. (i 
reckoned i wouldn't say nothing about the dollar i got from the judge.) i 
said it was pretty bad money, but maybe the hair-ball would take it, 
because maybe it wouldn't know the difference. jim smelt it and bit it 
and rubbed it, and said he would manage so the hair-ball would think it 
was good. he said he would split open a raw irish potato and stick the 
quarter in between and keep it there all night, and next morning you 
couldn't see no brass, and it wouldn't feel greasy no more, and so 
anybody in town would take it in a minute, let alone a hair-ball. well, 
i knowed a potato would do that before, but i had forgot it. 
jim put the quarter under the hair-ball, and got down and listened again. 
this time he said the hair-ball was all right. he said it would tell my 
whole fortune if i wanted it to. i says, go on. so the hair-ball talked 
to jim, and jim told it to me. he says: 
"yo' ole father doan' know yit what he's a-gwyne to do. sometimes he 
spec he'll go 'way, en den agin he spec he'll stay. de bes' way is to 
res' easy en let de ole man take his own way. dey's two angels hoverin' 
roun' 'bout him. one uv 'em is white en shiny, en t'other one is black. 
de white one gits him to go right a little while, den de black one sail 
in en bust it all up. a body can't tell yit which one gwyne to fetch him 
at de las'. but you is all right. you gwyne to have considable trouble 
in yo' life, en considable joy. sometimes you gwyne to git hurt, en 
sometimes you gwyne to git sick; but every time you's gwyne to git well 
agin. dey's two gals flyin' 'bout you in yo' life. one uv 'em's light 
en t'other one is dark. one is rich en t'other is po'. you's gwyne to 
marry de po' one fust en de rich one by en by. you wants to keep 'way 
fum de water as much as you kin, en don't run no resk, 'kase it's down in 
de bills dat you's gwyne to git hung." 
when i lit my candle and went up to my room that night there sat pap-his 
own self! 
chapter v. 
i had shut the door to. then i turned around and there he was. i used 
to be scared of him all the time, he tanned me so much. i reckoned i was 
scared now, too; but in a minute i see i was mistaken-that is, after the 
first jolt, as you may say, when my breath sort of hitched, he being so 
unexpected; but right away after i see i warn't scared of him worth 
bothring about. 
he was most fifty, and he looked it. his hair was long and tangled and 
greasy, and hung down, and you could see his eyes shining through like he 
was behind vines. it was all black, no gray; so was his long, mixed-up 
whiskers. there warn't no color in his face, where his face showed; it 
was white; not like another man's white, but a white to make a body sick, 
a white to make a body's flesh crawl-a tree-toad white, a fish-belly 
white. as for his clothes-just rags, that was all. he had one ankle 
resting on t'other knee; the boot on that foot was busted, and two of his 
toes stuck through, and he worked them now and then. his hat was laying 
on the floor-an old black slouch with the top caved in, like a lid. 
i stood a-looking at him; he set there a-looking at me, with his chair 
tilted back a little. i set the candle down. i noticed the window was 
up; so he had clumb in by the shed. he kept a-looking me all over. by 
and by he says: 
"starchy clothes-very. you think you're a good deal of a big-bug, don't 
you?" 
"maybe i am, maybe i ain't," i says. 
"don't you give me none o' your lip," says he. "you've put on 
considerable many frills since i been away. i'll take you down a peg 
before i get done with you. you're educated, too, they say-can read and 
write. you think you're better'n your father, now, don't you, because he 
can't? i'll take it out of you. who told you you might meddle with such 
hifalut'n foolishness, hey?-who told you you could?" 
"the widow. she told me." 
"the widow, hey?-and who told the widow she could put in her shovel 
about a thing that ain't none of her business?" 
"nobody never told her." 
"well, i'll learn her how to meddle. and looky here-you drop that 
school, you hear? i'll learn people to bring up a boy to put on airs 
over his own father and let on to be better'n what he is. you lemme 
catch you fooling around that school again, you hear? your mother 
couldn't read, and she couldn't write, nuther, before she died. none of 
the family couldn't before they died. i can't; and here you're 
a-swelling yourself up like this. i ain't the man to stand it-you hear? 
say, lemme hear you read." 
i took up a book and begun something about general washington and the 
wars. when i'd read about a half a minute, he fetched the book a whack 
with his hand and knocked it across the house. he says: 
"it's so. you can do it. i had my doubts when you told me. now looky 
here; you stop that putting on frills. i won't have it. i'll lay for 
you, my smarty; and if i catch you about that school i'll tan you good. 
first you know you'll get religion, too. i never see such a son." 
he took up a little blue and yaller picture of some cows and a boy, and 
says: 
"what's this?" 
"it's something they give me for learning my lessons good." 
he tore it up, and says: 
"i'll give you something better-i'll give you a cowhide." 
he set there a-mumbling and a-growling a minute, and then he says: 
"ain't you a sweet-scented dandy, though? a bed; and bedclothes; and a 
look'n'-glass; and a piece of carpet on the floor-and your own father 
got to sleep with the hogs in the tanyard. i never see such a son. i 
bet i'll take some o' these frills out o' you before i'm done with you. 
why, there ain't no end to your airs-they say you're rich. hey?-how's 
that?" 
"they lie-that's how." 
"looky here-mind how you talk to me; i'm a-standing about all i can 
stand now-so don't gimme no sass. i've been in town two days, and i 
hain't heard nothing but about you bein' rich. i heard about it away 
down the river, too. that's why i come. you git me that money 
to-morrow-i want it." 
"i hain't got no money." 
"it's a lie. judge thatcher's got it. you git it. i want it." 
"i hain't got no money, i tell you. you ask judge thatcher; he'll tell 
you the same." 
"all right. i'll ask him; and i'll make him pungle, too, or i'll know 
the reason why. say, how much you got in your pocket? i want it." 
"i hain't got only a dollar, and i want that to-" 
"it don't make no difference what you want it for-you just shell it 
out." 
he took it and bit it to see if it was good, and then he said he was 
going down town to get some whisky; said he hadn't had a drink all day. 
when he had got out on the shed he put his head in again, and cussed me 
for putting on frills and trying to be better than him; and when i 
reckoned he was gone he come back and put his head in again, and told me 
to mind about that school, because he was going to lay for me and lick me 
if i didn't drop that. 
next day he was drunk, and he went to judge thatcher's and bullyragged 
him, and tried to make him give up the money; but he couldn't, and then 
he swore he'd make the law force him. 
the judge and the widow went to law to get the court to take me away from 
him and let one of them be my guardian; but it was a new judge that had 
just come, and he didn't know the old man; so he said courts mustn't 
interfere and separate families if they could help it; said he'd druther 
not take a child away from its father. so judge thatcher and the widow 
had to quit on the business. 
that pleased the old man till he couldn't rest. he said he'd cowhide me 
till i was black and blue if i didn't raise some money for him. i 
borrowed three dollars from judge thatcher, and pap took it and got 
drunk, and went a-blowing around and cussing and whooping and carrying 
on; and he kept it up all over town, with a tin pan, till most midnight; 
then they jailed him, and next day they had him before court, and jailed 
him again for a week. but he said he was satisfied; said he was boss of 
his son, and he'd make it warm for him. 
when he got out the new judge said he was a-going to make a man of him. 
so he took him to his own house, and dressed him up clean and nice, and 
had him to breakfast and dinner and supper with the family, and was just 
old pie to him, so to speak. and after supper he talked to him about 
temperance and such things till the old man cried, and said he'd been a 
fool, and fooled away his life; but now he was a-going to turn over a new 
leaf and be a man nobody wouldn't be ashamed of, and he hoped the judge 
would help him and not look down on him. the judge said he could hug him 
for them words; so he cried, and his wife she cried again; pap said he'd 
been a man that had always been misunderstood before, and the judge said 
he believed it. the old man said that what a man wanted that was down 
was sympathy, and the judge said it was so; so they cried again. and 
when it was bedtime the old man rose up and held out his hand, and says: 
"look at it, gentlemen and ladies all; take a-hold of it; shake it. 
there's a hand that was the hand of a hog; but it ain't so no more; it's 
the hand of a man that's started in on a new life, and'll die before 
he'll go back. you mark them words-don't forget i said them. it's a 
clean hand now; shake it-don't be afeard." 
so they shook it, one after the other, all around, and cried. the 
judge's wife she kissed it. then the old man he signed a pledge-made 
his mark. the judge said it was the holiest time on record, or something 
like that. then they tucked the old man into a beautiful room, which was 
the spare room, and in the night some time he got powerful thirsty and 
clumb out on to the porch-roof and slid down a stanchion and traded his 
new coat for a jug of forty-rod, and clumb back again and had a good old 
time; and towards daylight he crawled out again, drunk as a fiddler, and 
rolled off the porch and broke his left arm in two places, and was most 
froze to death when somebody found him after sun-up. and when they come 
to look at that spare room they had to take soundings before they could 
navigate it. 
the judge he felt kind of sore. he said he reckoned a body could reform 
the old man with a shotgun, maybe, but he didn't know no other way. 
chapter vi. 
well, pretty soon the old man was up and around again, and then he went 
for judge thatcher in the courts to make him give up that money, and he 
went for me, too, for not stopping school. he catched me a couple of 
times and thrashed me, but i went to school just the same, and dodged him 
or outrun him most of the time. i didn't want to go to school much 
before, but i reckoned i'd go now to spite pap. that law trial was a 
slow business-appeared like they warn't ever going to get started on 
it; so every now and then i'd borrow two or three dollars off of the 
judge for him, to keep from getting a cowhiding. every time he got money 
he got drunk; and every time he got drunk he raised cain around town; and 
every time he raised cain he got jailed. he was just suited-this kind 
of thing was right in his line. 
he got to hanging around the widow's too much and so she told him at last 
that if he didn't quit using around there she would make trouble for him. 
well, wasn't he mad? he said he would show who was huck finn's boss. so 
he watched out for me one day in the spring, and catched me, and took me 
up the river about three mile in a skiff, and crossed over to the 
illinois shore where it was woody and there warn't no houses but an old 
log hut in a place where the timber was so thick you couldn't find it if 
you didn't know where it was. 
he kept me with him all the time, and i never got a chance to run off. 
we lived in that old cabin, and he always locked the door and put the key 
under his head nights. he had a gun which he had stole, i reckon, and we 
fished and hunted, and that was what we lived on. every little while he 
locked me in and went down to the store, three miles, to the ferry, and 
traded fish and game for whisky, and fetched it home and got drunk and 
had a good time, and licked me. the widow she found out where i was by 
and by, and she sent a man over to try to get hold of me; but pap drove 
him off with the gun, and it warn't long after that till i was used to 
being where i was, and liked it-all but the cowhide part. 
it was kind of lazy and jolly, laying off comfortable all day, smoking 
and fishing, and no books nor study. two months or more run along, and 
my clothes got to be all rags and dirt, and i didn't see how i'd ever got 
to like it so well at the widow's, where you had to wash, and eat on a 
plate, and comb up, and go to bed and get up regular, and be forever 
bothering over a book, and have old miss watson pecking at you all the 
time. i didn't want to go back no more. i had stopped cussing, because 
the widow didn't like it; but now i took to it again because pap hadn't 
no objections. it was pretty good times up in the woods there, take it 
all around. 
but by and by pap got too handy with his hick'ry, and i couldn't stand 
it. i was all over welts. he got to going away so much, too, and locking 
me in. once he locked me in and was gone three days. it was dreadful 
lonesome. i judged he had got drowned, and i wasn't ever going to get 
out any more. i was scared. i made up my mind i would fix up some way 
to leave there. i had tried to get out of that cabin many a time, but i 
couldn't find no way. there warn't a window to it big enough for a dog 
to get through. i couldn't get up the chimbly; it was too narrow. the 
door was thick, solid oak slabs. pap was pretty careful not to leave a 
knife or anything in the cabin when he was away; i reckon i had hunted 
the place over as much as a hundred times; well, i was most all the time 
at it, because it was about the only way to put in the time. but this 
time i found something at last; i found an old rusty wood-saw without any 
handle; it was laid in between a rafter and the clapboards of the roof. 
i greased it up and went to work. there was an old horse-blanket nailed 
against the logs at the far end of the cabin behind the table, to keep 
the wind from blowing through the chinks and putting the candle out. i 
got under the table and raised the blanket, and went to work to saw a 
section of the big bottom log out-big enough to let me through. well, 
it was a good long job, but i was getting towards the end of it when i 
heard pap's gun in the woods. i got rid of the signs of my work, and 
dropped the blanket and hid my saw, and pretty soon pap come in. 
pap warn't in a good humor-so he was his natural self. he said he was 
down town, and everything was going wrong. his lawyer said he reckoned 
he would win his lawsuit and get the money if they ever got started on 
the trial; but then there was ways to put it off a long time, and judge 
thatcher knowed how to do it. and he said people allowed there'd be 
another trial to get me away from him and give me to the widow for my 
guardian, and they guessed it would win this time. this shook me up 
considerable, because i didn't want to go back to the widow's any more 
and be so cramped up and sivilized, as they called it. then the old man 
got to cussing, and cussed everything and everybody he could think of, 
and then cussed them all over again to make sure he hadn't skipped any, 
and after that he polished off with a kind of a general cuss all round, 
including a considerable parcel of people which he didn't know the names 
of, and so called them what's-his-name when he got to them, and went 
right along with his cussing. 
he said he would like to see the widow get me. he said he would watch 
out, and if they tried to come any such game on him he knowed of a place 
six or seven mile off to stow me in, where they might hunt till they 
dropped and they couldn't find me. that made me pretty uneasy again, but 
only for a minute; i reckoned i wouldn't stay on hand till he got that 
chance. 
the old man made me go to the skiff and fetch the things he had got. 
there was a fifty-pound sack of corn meal, and a side of bacon, 
ammunition, and a four-gallon jug of whisky, and an old book and two 
newspapers for wadding, besides some tow. i toted up a load, and went 
back and set down on the bow of the skiff to rest. i thought it all 
over, and i reckoned i would walk off with the gun and some lines, and 
take to the woods when i run away. i guessed i wouldn't stay in one 
place, but just tramp right across the country, mostly night times, and 
hunt and fish to keep alive, and so get so far away that the old man nor 
the widow couldn't ever find me any more. i judged i would saw out and 
leave that night if pap got drunk enough, and i reckoned he would. i got 
so full of it i didn't notice how long i was staying till the old man 
hollered and asked me whether i was asleep or drownded. 
i got the things all up to the cabin, and then it was about dark. while 
i was cooking supper the old man took a swig or two and got sort of 
warmed up, and went to ripping again. he had been drunk over in town, 
and laid in the gutter all night, and he was a sight to look at. a body 
would a thought he was adam-he was just all mud. whenever his liquor 
begun to work he most always went for the govment, this time he says: 
"call this a govment! why, just look at it and see what it's like. 
here's the law a-standing ready to take a man's son away from him-a 
man's own son, which he has had all the trouble and all the anxiety and 
all the expense of raising. yes, just as that man has got that son 
raised at last, and ready to go to work and begin to do suthin' for him 
and give him a rest, the law up and goes for him. and they call that 
govment! that ain't all, nuther. the law backs that old judge thatcher 
up and helps him to keep me out o' my property. here's what the law 
does: the law takes a man worth six thousand dollars and up'ards, and 
jams him into an old trap of a cabin like this, and lets him go round in 
clothes that ain't fitten for a hog. they call that govment! a man can't 
get his rights in a govment like this. sometimes i've a mighty notion to 
just leave the country for good and all. yes, and i told 'em so; i told 
old thatcher so to his face. lots of 'em heard me, and can tell what i 
said. says i, for two cents i'd leave the blamed country and never come 
a-near it agin. them's the very words. i says look at my hat-if you 
call it a hat-but the lid raises up and the rest of it goes down till 
it's below my chin, and then it ain't rightly a hat at all, but more like 
my head was shoved up through a jint o' stove-pipe. look at it, says i 
such a hat for me to wear-one of the wealthiest men in this town if i 
could git my rights. 
"oh, yes, this is a wonderful govment, wonderful. why, looky here. 
there was a free nigger there from ohio-a mulatter, most as white as a 
white man. he had the whitest shirt on you ever see, too, and the 
shiniest hat; and there ain't a man in that town that's got as fine 
clothes as what he had; and he had a gold watch and chain, and a 
silver-headed cane-the awfulest old gray-headed nabob in the state. and 
what do you think? they said he was a p'fessor in a college, and could 
talk all kinds of languages, and knowed everything. and that ain't the 
wust. they said he could vote when he was at home. well, that let me 
out. thinks i, what is the country a-coming to? it was 'lection day, and 
i was just about to go and vote myself if i warn't too drunk to get 
there; but when they told me there was a state in this country where 
they'd let that nigger vote, i drawed out. i says i'll never vote agin. 
them's the very words i said; they all heard me; and the country may rot 
for all me-i'll never vote agin as long as i live. and to see the cool 
way of that nigger-why, he wouldn't a give me the road if i hadn't 
shoved him out o' the way. i says to the people, why ain't this nigger 
put up at auction and sold?-that's what i want to know. and what do you 
reckon they said? why, they said he couldn't be sold till he'd been in 
the state six months, and he hadn't been there that long yet. there, 
now-that's a specimen. they call that a govment that can't sell a free 
nigger till he's been in the state six months. here's a govment that 
calls itself a govment, and lets on to be a govment, and thinks it is a 
govment, and yet's got to set stock-still for six whole months before it 
can take a hold of a prowling, thieving, infernal, white-shirted free 
nigger, and-" 
pap was agoing on so he never noticed where his old limber legs was 
taking him to, so he went head over heels over the tub of salt pork and 
barked both shins, and the rest of his speech was all the hottest kind of 
language-mostly hove at the nigger and the govment, though he give the 
tub some, too, all along, here and there. he hopped around the cabin 
considerable, first on one leg and then on the other, holding first one 
shin and then the other one, and at last he let out with his left foot 
all of a sudden and fetched the tub a rattling kick. but it warn't good 
judgment, because that was the boot that had a couple of his toes leaking 
out of the front end of it; so now he raised a howl that fairly made a 
body's hair raise, and down he went in the dirt, and rolled there, and 
held his toes; and the cussing he done then laid over anything he had 
ever done previous. he said so his own self afterwards. he had heard 
old sowberry hagan in his best days, and he said it laid over him, too; 
but i reckon that was sort of piling it on, maybe. 
after supper pap took the jug, and said he had enough whisky there for 
two drunks and one delirium tremens. that was always his word. i judged 
he would be blind drunk in about an hour, and then i would steal the key, 
or saw myself out, one or t'other. he drank and drank, and tumbled down 
on his blankets by and by; but luck didn't run my way. he didn't go 
sound asleep, but was uneasy. he groaned and moaned and thrashed around 
this way and that for a long time. at last i got so sleepy i couldn't 
keep my eyes open all i could do, and so before i knowed what i was about 
i was sound asleep, and the candle burning. 
i don't know how long i was asleep, but all of a sudden there was an 
awful scream and i was up. there was pap looking wild, and skipping 
around every which way and yelling about snakes. he said they was 
crawling up his legs; and then he would give a jump and scream, and say 
one had bit him on the cheek-but i couldn't see no snakes. he started 
and run round and round the cabin, hollering "take him off! take him off! 
he's biting me on the neck!" i never see a man look so wild in the eyes. 
pretty soon he was all fagged out, and fell down panting; then he rolled 
over and over wonderful fast, kicking things every which way, and 
striking and grabbing at the air with his hands, and screaming and saying 
there was devils a-hold of him. he wore out by and by, and laid still a 
while, moaning. then he laid stiller, and didn't make a sound. i could 
hear the owls and the wolves away off in the woods, and it seemed 
terrible still. he was laying over by the corner. by and by he raised up 
part way and listened, with his head to one side. he says, very low: 
"tramp-tramp-tramp; that's the dead; tramp-tramp-tramp; they're 
coming after me; but i won't go. oh, they're here! don't touch me 
don't! hands off-they're cold; let go. oh, let a poor devil alone!" 
then he went down on all fours and crawled off, begging them to let him 
alone, and he rolled himself up in his blanket and wallowed in under the 
old pine table, still a-begging; and then he went to crying. i could 
hear him through the blanket. 
by and by he rolled out and jumped up on his feet looking wild, and he 
see me and went for me. he chased me round and round the place with a 
clasp-knife, calling me the angel of death, and saying he would kill me, 
and then i couldn't come for him no more. i begged, and told him i was 
only huck; but he laughed such a screechy laugh, and roared and cussed, 
and kept on chasing me up. once when i turned short and dodged under his 
arm he made a grab and got me by the jacket between my shoulders, and i 
thought i was gone; but i slid out of the jacket quick as lightning, and 
saved myself. pretty soon he was all tired out, and dropped down with his 
back against the door, and said he would rest a minute and then kill me. 
he put his knife under him, and said he would sleep and get strong, and 
then he would see who was who. 
so he dozed off pretty soon. by and by i got the old split-bottom chair 
and clumb up as easy as i could, not to make any noise, and got down the 
gun. i slipped the ramrod down it to make sure it was loaded, then i 
laid it across the turnip barrel, pointing towards pap, and set down 
behind it to wait for him to stir. and how slow and still the time did 
drag along. 
chapter vii. 
"git up! what you 'bout?" 
i opened my eyes and looked around, trying to make out where i was. it 
was after sun-up, and i had been sound asleep. pap was standing over me 
looking sour and sick, too. he says: 
"what you doin' with this gun?" 
i judged he didn't know nothing about what he had been doing, so i says: 
"somebody tried to get in, so i was laying for him." 
"why didn't you roust me out?" 
"well, i tried to, but i couldn't; i couldn't budge you." 
"well, all right. don't stand there palavering all day, but out with you 
and see if there's a fish on the lines for breakfast. i'll be along in a 
minute." 
he unlocked the door, and i cleared out up the river-bank. i noticed 
some pieces of limbs and such things floating down, and a sprinkling of 
bark; so i knowed the river had begun to rise. i reckoned i would have 
great times now if i was over at the town. the june rise used to be 
always luck for me; because as soon as that rise begins here comes 
cordwood floating down, and pieces of log rafts-sometimes a dozen logs 
together; so all you have to do is to catch them and sell them to the 
wood-yards and the sawmill. 
i went along up the bank with one eye out for pap and t'other one out for 
what the rise might fetch along. well, all at once here comes a canoe; 
just a beauty, too, about thirteen or fourteen foot long, riding high 
like a duck. i shot head-first off of the bank like a frog, clothes and 
all on, and struck out for the canoe. i just expected there'd be 
somebody laying down in it, because people often done that to fool folks, 
and when a chap had pulled a skiff out most to it they'd raise up and 
laugh at him. but it warn't so this time. it was a drift-canoe sure 
enough, and i clumb in and paddled her ashore. thinks i, the old man 
will be glad when he sees this-she's worth ten dollars. but when i 
got to shore pap wasn't in sight yet, and as i was running her into a 
little creek like a gully, all hung over with vines and willows, i struck 
another idea: i judged i'd hide her good, and then, 'stead of taking to 
the woods when i run off, i'd go down the river about fifty mile and camp 
in one place for good, and not have such a rough time tramping on foot. 
it was pretty close to the shanty, and i thought i heard the old man 
coming all the time; but i got her hid; and then i out and looked around 
a bunch of willows, and there was the old man down the path a piece just 
drawing a bead on a bird with his gun. so he hadn't seen anything. 
when he got along i was hard at it taking up a "trot" line. he abused me 
a little for being so slow; but i told him i fell in the river, and that 
was what made me so long. i knowed he would see i was wet, and then he 
would be asking questions. we got five catfish off the lines and went 
home. 
while we laid off after breakfast to sleep up, both of us being about 
wore out, i got to thinking that if i could fix up some way to keep pap 
and the widow from trying to follow me, it would be a certainer thing 
than trusting to luck to get far enough off before they missed me; you 
see, all kinds of things might happen. well, i didn't see no way for a 
while, but by and by pap raised up a minute to drink another barrel of 
water, and he says: 
"another time a man comes a-prowling round here you roust me out, you 
hear? that man warn't here for no good. i'd a shot him. next time you 
roust me out, you hear?" 
then he dropped down and went to sleep again; but what he had been saying 
give me the very idea i wanted. i says to myself, i can fix it now so 
nobody won't think of following me. 
about twelve o'clock we turned out and went along up the bank. the river 
was coming up pretty fast, and lots of driftwood going by on the rise. 
by and by along comes part of a log raft-nine logs fast together. we 
went out with the skiff and towed it ashore. then we had dinner. 
anybody but pap would a waited and seen the day through, so as to catch 
more stuff; but that warn't pap's style. nine logs was enough for one 
time; he must shove right over to town and sell. so he locked me in and 
took the skiff, and started off towing the raft about half-past three. i 
judged he wouldn't come back that night. i waited till i reckoned he had 
got a good start; then i out with my saw, and went to work on that log 
again. before he was t'other side of the river i was out of the hole; 
him and his raft was just a speck on the water away off yonder. 
i took the sack of corn meal and took it to where the canoe was hid, and 
shoved the vines and branches apart and put it in; then i done the same 
with the side of bacon; then the whisky-jug. i took all the coffee and 
sugar there was, and all the ammunition; i took the wadding; i took the 
bucket and gourd; i took a dipper and a tin cup, and my old saw and two 
blankets, and the skillet and the coffee-pot. i took fish-lines and 
matches and other things-everything that was worth a cent. i cleaned 
out the place. i wanted an axe, but there wasn't any, only the one out 
at the woodpile, and i knowed why i was going to leave that. i fetched 
out the gun, and now i was done. 
i had wore the ground a good deal crawling out of the hole and dragging 
out so many things. so i fixed that as good as i could from the outside 
by scattering dust on the place, which covered up the smoothness and the 
sawdust. then i fixed the piece of log back into its place, and put two 
rocks under it and one against it to hold it there, for it was bent up at 
that place and didn't quite touch ground. if you stood four or five foot 
away and didn't know it was sawed, you wouldn't never notice it; and 
besides, this was the back of the cabin, and it warn't likely anybody 
would go fooling around there. 
it was all grass clear to the canoe, so i hadn't left a track. i 
followed around to see. i stood on the bank and looked out over the 
river. all safe. so i took the gun and went up a piece into the woods, 
and was hunting around for some birds when i see a wild pig; hogs soon 
went wild in them bottoms after they had got away from the prairie farms. 
i shot this fellow and took him into camp. 
i took the axe and smashed in the door. i beat it and hacked it 
considerable a-doing it. i fetched the pig in, and took him back nearly 
to the table and hacked into his throat with the axe, and laid him down 
on the ground to bleed; i say ground because it was ground-hard packed, 
and no boards. well, next i took an old sack and put a lot of big rocks 
in it-all i could drag-and i started it from the pig, and dragged it 
to the door and through the woods down to the river and dumped it in, and 
down it sunk, out of sight. you could easy see that something had been 
dragged over the ground. i did wish tom sawyer was there; i knowed he 
would take an interest in this kind of business, and throw in the fancy 
touches. nobody could spread himself like tom sawyer in such a thing as 
that. 
well, last i pulled out some of my hair, and blooded the axe good, and 
stuck it on the back side, and slung the axe in the corner. then i took 
up the pig and held him to my breast with my jacket (so he couldn't drip) 
till i got a good piece below the house and then dumped him into the 
river. now i thought of something else. so i went and got the bag of 
meal and my old saw out of the canoe, and fetched them to the house. i 
took the bag to where it used to stand, and ripped a hole in the bottom 
of it with the saw, for there warn't no knives and forks on the place 
pap done everything with his clasp-knife about the cooking. then i 
carried the sack about a hundred yards across the grass and through the 
willows east of the house, to a shallow lake that was five mile wide and 
full of rushes-and ducks too, you might say, in the season. there was a 
slough or a creek leading out of it on the other side that went miles 
away, i don't know where, but it didn't go to the river. the meal sifted 
out and made a little track all the way to the lake. i dropped pap's 
whetstone there too, so as to look like it had been done by accident. 
then i tied up the rip in the meal sack with a string, so it wouldn't 
leak no more, and took it and my saw to the canoe again. 
it was about dark now; so i dropped the canoe down the river under some 
willows that hung over the bank, and waited for the moon to rise. i made 
fast to a willow; then i took a bite to eat, and by and by laid down in 
the canoe to smoke a pipe and lay out a plan. i says to myself, they'll 
follow the track of that sackful of rocks to the shore and then drag the 
river for me. and they'll follow that meal track to the lake and go 
browsing down the creek that leads out of it to find the robbers that 
killed me and took the things. they won't ever hunt the river for 
anything but my dead carcass. they'll soon get tired of that, and won't 
bother no more about me. all right; i can stop anywhere i want to. 
jackson's island is good enough for me; i know that island pretty well, 
and nobody ever comes there. and then i can paddle over to town nights, 
and slink around and pick up things i want. jackson's island's the place. 
i was pretty tired, and the first thing i knowed i was asleep. when i 
woke up i didn't know where i was for a minute. i set up and looked 
around, a little scared. then i remembered. the river looked miles and 
miles across. the moon was so bright i could a counted the drift logs 
that went a-slipping along, black and still, hundreds of yards out from 
shore. everything was dead quiet, and it looked late, and smelt late. 
you know what i mean-i don't know the words to put it in. 
i took a good gap and a stretch, and was just going to unhitch and start 
when i heard a sound away over the water. i listened. pretty soon i 
made it out. it was that dull kind of a regular sound that comes from 
oars working in rowlocks when it's a still night. i peeped out through 
the willow branches, and there it was-a skiff, away across the water. i 
couldn't tell how many was in it. it kept a-coming, and when it was 
abreast of me i see there warn't but one man in it. think's i, maybe 
it's pap, though i warn't expecting him. he dropped below me with the 
current, and by and by he came a-swinging up shore in the easy water, and 
he went by so close i could a reached out the gun and touched him. well, 
it was pap, sure enough-and sober, too, by the way he laid his oars. 
i didn't lose no time. the next minute i was a-spinning down stream soft 
but quick in the shade of the bank. i made two mile and a half, and then 
struck out a quarter of a mile or more towards the middle of the river, 
because pretty soon i would be passing the ferry landing, and people 
might see me and hail me. i got out amongst the driftwood, and then laid 
down in the bottom of the canoe and let her float. i laid there, and had 
a good rest and a smoke out of my pipe, looking away into the sky; not a 
cloud in it. the sky looks ever so deep when you lay down on your back 
in the moonshine; i never knowed it before. and how far a body can hear 
on the water such nights! i heard people talking at the ferry landing. 
i heard what they said, too-every word of it. one man said it was 
getting towards the long days and the short nights now. t'other one said 
this warn't one of the short ones, he reckoned-and then they laughed, 
and he said it over again, and they laughed again; then they waked up 
another fellow and told him, and laughed, but he didn't laugh; he ripped 
out something brisk, and said let him alone. the first fellow said he 
'lowed to tell it to his old woman-she would think it was pretty good; 
but he said that warn't nothing to some things he had said in his time. 
i heard one man say it was nearly three o'clock, and he hoped daylight 
wouldn't wait more than about a week longer. after that the talk got 
further and further away, and i couldn't make out the words any more; but 
i could hear the mumble, and now and then a laugh, too, but it seemed a 
long ways off. 
i was away below the ferry now. i rose up, and there was jackson's 
island, about two mile and a half down stream, heavy timbered and 
standing up out of the middle of the river, big and dark and solid, like 
a steamboat without any lights. there warn't any signs of the bar at the 
head-it was all under water now. 
it didn't take me long to get there. i shot past the head at a ripping 
rate, the current was so swift, and then i got into the dead water and 
landed on the side towards the illinois shore. i run the canoe into a 
deep dent in the bank that i knowed about; i had to part the willow 
branches to get in; and when i made fast nobody could a seen the canoe 
from the outside. 
i went up and set down on a log at the head of the island, and looked out 
on the big river and the black driftwood and away over to the town, three 
mile away, where there was three or four lights twinkling. a monstrous 
big lumber-raft was about a mile up stream, coming along down, with a 
lantern in the middle of it. i watched it come creeping down, and when 
it was most abreast of where i stood i heard a man say, "stern oars, 
there! heave her head to stabboard!" i heard that just as plain as if 
the man was by my side. 
there was a little gray in the sky now; so i stepped into the woods, and 
laid down for a nap before breakfast. 
chapter viii. 
the sun was up so high when i waked that i judged it was after eight 
o'clock. i laid there in the grass and the cool shade thinking about 
things, and feeling rested and ruther comfortable and satisfied. i could 
see the sun out at one or two holes, but mostly it was big trees all 
about, and gloomy in there amongst them. there was freckled places on 
the ground where the light sifted down through the leaves, and the 
freckled places swapped about a little, showing there was a little breeze 
up there. a couple of squirrels set on a limb and jabbered at me very 
friendly. 
i was powerful lazy and comfortable-didn't want to get up and cook 
breakfast. well, i was dozing off again when i thinks i hears a deep 
sound of "boom!" away up the river. i rouses up, and rests on my elbow 
and listens; pretty soon i hears it again. i hopped up, and went and 
looked out at a hole in the leaves, and i see a bunch of smoke laying on 
the water a long ways up-about abreast the ferry. and there was the 
ferryboat full of people floating along down. i knowed what was the 
matter now. "boom!" i see the white smoke squirt out of the ferryboat's 
side. you see, they was firing cannon over the water, trying to make my 
carcass come to the top. 
i was pretty hungry, but it warn't going to do for me to start a fire, 
because they might see the smoke. so i set there and watched the 
cannon-smoke and listened to the boom. the river was a mile wide there, 
and it always looks pretty on a summer morning-so i was having a good 
enough time seeing them hunt for my remainders if i only had a bite to 
eat. well, then i happened to think how they always put quicksilver in 
loaves of bread and float them off, because they always go right to the 
drownded carcass and stop there. so, says i, i'll keep a lookout, and if 
any of them's floating around after me i'll give them a show. i changed 
to the illinois edge of the island to see what luck i could have, and i 
warn't disappointed. a big double loaf come along, and i most got it 
with a long stick, but my foot slipped and she floated out further. of 
course i was where the current set in the closest to the shore-i knowed 
enough for that. but by and by along comes another one, and this time i 
won. i took out the plug and shook out the little dab of quicksilver, 
and set my teeth in. it was "baker's bread"-what the quality eat; none 
of your low-down corn-pone. 
i got a good place amongst the leaves, and set there on a log, munching 
the bread and watching the ferry-boat, and very well satisfied. and then 
something struck me. i says, now i reckon the widow or the parson or 
somebody prayed that this bread would find me, and here it has gone and 
done it. so there ain't no doubt but there is something in that thing 
that is, there's something in it when a body like the widow or the parson 
prays, but it don't work for me, and i reckon it don't work for only just 
the right kind. 
i lit a pipe and had a good long smoke, and went on watching. the 
ferryboat was floating with the current, and i allowed i'd have a chance 
to see who was aboard when she come along, because she would come in 
close, where the bread did. when she'd got pretty well along down 
towards me, i put out my pipe and went to where i fished out the bread, 
and laid down behind a log on the bank in a little open place. where the 
log forked i could peep through. 
by and by she come along, and she drifted in so close that they could a 
run out a plank and walked ashore. most everybody was on the boat. pap, 
and judge thatcher, and bessie thatcher, and jo harper, and tom sawyer, 
and his old aunt polly, and sid and mary, and plenty more. everybody was 
talking about the murder, but the captain broke in and says: 
"look sharp, now; the current sets in the closest here, and maybe he's 
washed ashore and got tangled amongst the brush at the water's edge. i 
hope so, anyway." 
"i didn't hope so. they all crowded up and leaned over the rails, nearly 
in my face, and kept still, watching with all their might. i could see 
them first-rate, but they couldn't see me. then the captain sung out: 
"stand away!" and the cannon let off such a blast right before me that it 
made me deef with the noise and pretty near blind with the smoke, and i 
judged i was gone. if they'd a had some bullets in, i reckon they'd a 
got the corpse they was after. well, i see i warn't hurt, thanks to 
goodness. the boat floated on and went out of sight around the shoulder 
of the island. i could hear the booming now and then, further and 
further off, and by and by, after an hour, i didn't hear it no more. the 
island was three mile long. i judged they had got to the foot, and was 
giving it up. but they didn't yet a while. they turned around the foot 
of the island and started up the channel on the missouri side, under 
steam, and booming once in a while as they went. i crossed over to that 
side and watched them. when they got abreast the head of the island they 
quit shooting and dropped over to the missouri shore and went home to the 
town. 
i knowed i was all right now. nobody else would come a-hunting after me. 
i got my traps out of the canoe and made me a nice camp in the thick 
woods. i made a kind of a tent out of my blankets to put my things under 
so the rain couldn't get at them. i catched a catfish and haggled him 
open with my saw, and towards sundown i started my camp fire and had 
supper. then i set out a line to catch some fish for breakfast. 
when it was dark i set by my camp fire smoking, and feeling pretty well 
satisfied; but by and by it got sort of lonesome, and so i went and set 
on the bank and listened to the current swashing along, and counted the 
stars and drift logs and rafts that come down, and then went to bed; 
there ain't no better way to put in time when you are lonesome; you can't 
stay so, you soon get over it. 
and so for three days and nights. no difference-just the same thing. 
but the next day i went exploring around down through the island. i was 
boss of it; it all belonged to me, so to say, and i wanted to know all 
about it; but mainly i wanted to put in the time. i found plenty 
strawberries, ripe and prime; and green summer grapes, and green 
razberries; and the green blackberries was just beginning to show. they 
would all come handy by and by, i judged. 
well, i went fooling along in the deep woods till i judged i warn't far 
from the foot of the island. i had my gun along, but i hadn't shot 
nothing; it was for protection; thought i would kill some game nigh home. 
about this time i mighty near stepped on a good-sized snake, and it went 
sliding off through the grass and flowers, and i after it, trying to get 
a shot at it. i clipped along, and all of a sudden i bounded right on to 
the ashes of a camp fire that was still smoking. 
my heart jumped up amongst my lungs. i never waited for to look further, 
but uncocked my gun and went sneaking back on my tiptoes as fast as ever 
i could. every now and then i stopped a second amongst the thick leaves 
and listened, but my breath come so hard i couldn't hear nothing else. i 
slunk along another piece further, then listened again; and so on, and so 
on. if i see a stump, i took it for a man; if i trod on a stick and 
broke it, it made me feel like a person had cut one of my breaths in two 
and i only got half, and the short half, too. 
when i got to camp i warn't feeling very brash, there warn't much sand in 
my craw; but i says, this ain't no time to be fooling around. so i got 
all my traps into my canoe again so as to have them out of sight, and i 
put out the fire and scattered the ashes around to look like an old last 
year's camp, and then clumb a tree. 
i reckon i was up in the tree two hours; but i didn't see nothing, i 
didn't hear nothing-i only thought i heard and seen as much as a 
thousand things. well, i couldn't stay up there forever; so at last i 
got down, but i kept in the thick woods and on the lookout all the time. 
all i could get to eat was berries and what was left over from breakfast. 
by the time it was night i was pretty hungry. so when it was good and 
dark i slid out from shore before moonrise and paddled over to the 
illinois bank-about a quarter of a mile. i went out in the woods and 
cooked a supper, and i had about made up my mind i would stay there all 
night when i hear a plunkety-plunk, plunkety-plunk, and says to myself, 
horses coming; and next i hear people's voices. i got everything into 
the canoe as quick as i could, and then went creeping through the woods 
to see what i could find out. i hadn't got far when i hear a man say: 
"we better camp here if we can find a good place; the horses is about 
beat out. let's look around." 
i didn't wait, but shoved out and paddled away easy. i tied up in the 
old place, and reckoned i would sleep in the canoe. 
i didn't sleep much. i couldn't, somehow, for thinking. and every time 
i waked up i thought somebody had me by the neck. so the sleep didn't do 
me no good. by and by i says to myself, i can't live this way; i'm 
a-going to find out who it is that's here on the island with me; i'll 
find it out or bust. well, i felt better right off. 
so i took my paddle and slid out from shore just a step or two, and then 
let the canoe drop along down amongst the shadows. the moon was shining, 
and outside of the shadows it made it most as light as day. i poked 
along well on to an hour, everything still as rocks and sound asleep. 
well, by this time i was most down to the foot of the island. a little 
ripply, cool breeze begun to blow, and that was as good as saying the 
night was about done. i give her a turn with the paddle and brung her 
nose to shore; then i got my gun and slipped out and into the edge of the 
woods. i sat down there on a log, and looked out through the leaves. i 
see the moon go off watch, and the darkness begin to blanket the river. 
but in a little while i see a pale streak over the treetops, and knowed 
the day was coming. so i took my gun and slipped off towards where i had 
run across that camp fire, stopping every minute or two to listen. but i 
hadn't no luck somehow; i couldn't seem to find the place. but by and 
by, sure enough, i catched a glimpse of fire away through the trees. i 
went for it, cautious and slow. by and by i was close enough to have a 
look, and there laid a man on the ground. it most give me the fantods. 
he had a blanket around his head, and his head was nearly in the fire. i 
set there behind a clump of bushes in about six foot of him, and kept my 
eyes on him steady. it was getting gray daylight now. pretty soon he 
gapped and stretched himself and hove off the blanket, and it was miss 
watson's jim! i bet i was glad to see him. i says: 
"hello, jim!" and skipped out. 
he bounced up and stared at me wild. then he drops down on his knees, 
and puts his hands together and says: 
"doan' hurt me-don't! i hain't ever done no harm to a ghos'. i alwuz 
liked dead people, en done all i could for 'em. you go en git in de 
river agin, whah you b'longs, en doan' do nuffn to ole jim, 'at 'uz awluz 
yo' fren'." 
well, i warn't long making him understand i warn't dead. i was ever so 
glad to see jim. i warn't lonesome now. i told him i warn't afraid of 
him telling the people where i was. i talked along, but he only set 
there and looked at me; never said nothing. then i says: 
"it's good daylight. le's get breakfast. make up your camp fire good." 
"what's de use er makin' up de camp fire to cook strawbries en sich 
truck? but you got a gun, hain't you? den we kin git sumfn better den 
strawbries." 
"strawberries and such truck," i says. "is that what you live on?" 
"i couldn' git nuffn else," he says. 
"why, how long you been on the island, jim?" 
"i come heah de night arter you's killed." 
"what, all that time?" 
"yes-indeedy." 
"and ain't you had nothing but that kind of rubbage to eat?" 
"no, sah-nuffn else." 
"well, you must be most starved, ain't you?" 
"i reck'n i could eat a hoss. i think i could. how long you ben on de 
islan'?" 
"since the night i got killed." 
"no! w'y, what has you lived on? but you got a gun. oh, yes, you got a 
gun. dat's good. now you kill sumfn en i'll make up de fire." 
so we went over to where the canoe was, and while he built a fire in a 
grassy open place amongst the trees, i fetched meal and bacon and coffee, 
and coffee-pot and frying-pan, and sugar and tin cups, and the nigger was 
set back considerable, because he reckoned it was all done with 
witchcraft. i catched a good big catfish, too, and jim cleaned him with 
his knife, and fried him. 
when breakfast was ready we lolled on the grass and eat it smoking hot. 
jim laid it in with all his might, for he was most about starved. then 
when we had got pretty well stuffed, we laid off and lazied. by and by 
jim says: 
"but looky here, huck, who wuz it dat 'uz killed in dat shanty ef it 
warn't you?" 
then i told him the whole thing, and he said it was smart. he said tom 
sawyer couldn't get up no better plan than what i had. then i says: 
"how do you come to be here, jim, and how'd you get here?" 
he looked pretty uneasy, and didn't say nothing for a minute. then he 
says: 
"maybe i better not tell." 
"why, jim?" 
"well, dey's reasons. but you wouldn' tell on me ef i uz to tell you, 
would you, huck?" 
"blamed if i would, jim." 
"well, i b'lieve you, huck. i-i run off." 
"jim!" 
"but mind, you said you wouldn' tell-you know you said you wouldn' tell, 
huck." 
"well, i did. i said i wouldn't, and i'll stick to it. honest injun, i 
will. people would call me a low-down abolitionist and despise me for 
keeping mum-but that don't make no difference. i ain't a-going to tell, 
and i ain't a-going back there, anyways. so, now, le's know all about 
it." 
"well, you see, it 'uz dis way. ole missus-dat's miss watson-she pecks 
on me all de time, en treats me pooty rough, but she awluz said she 
wouldn' sell me down to orleans. but i noticed dey wuz a nigger trader 
roun' de place considable lately, en i begin to git oneasy. well, one 
night i creeps to de do' pooty late, en de do' warn't quite shet, en i 
hear old missus tell de widder she gwyne to sell me down to orleans, but 
she didn' want to, but she could git eight hund'd dollars for me, en it 
'uz sich a big stack o' money she couldn' resis'. de widder she try to 
git her to say she wouldn' do it, but i never waited to hear de res'. i 
lit out mighty quick, i tell you. 
"i tuck out en shin down de hill, en 'spec to steal a skift 'long de sho' 
som'ers 'bove de town, but dey wuz people a-stirring yit, so i hid in de 
ole tumble-down cooper-shop on de bank to wait for everybody to go 'way. 
well, i wuz dah all night. dey wuz somebody roun' all de time. 'long 
'bout six in de mawnin' skifts begin to go by, en 'bout eight er nine 
every skift dat went 'long wuz talkin' 'bout how yo' pap come over to de 
town en say you's killed. dese las' skifts wuz full o' ladies en genlmen 
a-goin' over for to see de place. sometimes dey'd pull up at de sho' en 
take a res' b'fo' dey started acrost, so by de talk i got to know all 
'bout de killin'. i 'uz powerful sorry you's killed, huck, but i ain't 
no mo' now. 
"i laid dah under de shavin's all day. i 'uz hungry, but i warn't 
afeard; bekase i knowed ole missus en de widder wuz goin' to start to de 
camp-meet'n' right arter breakfas' en be gone all day, en dey knows i 
goes off wid de cattle 'bout daylight, so dey wouldn' 'spec to see me 
roun' de place, en so dey wouldn' miss me tell arter dark in de evenin'. 
de yuther servants wouldn' miss me, kase dey'd shin out en take holiday 
soon as de ole folks 'uz out'n de way. 
"well, when it come dark i tuck out up de river road, en went 'bout two 
mile er more to whah dey warn't no houses. i'd made up my mine 'bout 
what i's agwyne to do. you see, ef i kep' on tryin' to git away afoot, 
de dogs 'ud track me; ef i stole a skift to cross over, dey'd miss dat 
skift, you see, en dey'd know 'bout whah i'd lan' on de yuther side, en 
whah to pick up my track. so i says, a raff is what i's arter; it doan' 
make no track. 
"i see a light a-comin' roun' de p'int bymeby, so i wade' in en shove' a 
log ahead o' me en swum more'n half way acrost de river, en got in 
'mongst de drift-wood, en kep' my head down low, en kinder swum agin de 
current tell de raff come along. den i swum to de stern uv it en tuck 
a-holt. it clouded up en 'uz pooty dark for a little while. so i clumb 
up en laid down on de planks. de men 'uz all 'way yonder in de middle, 
whah de lantern wuz. de river wuz a-risin', en dey wuz a good current; 
so i reck'n'd 'at by fo' in de mawnin' i'd be twenty-five mile down de 
river, en den i'd slip in jis b'fo' daylight en swim asho', en take to 
de woods on de illinois side. 
"but i didn' have no luck. when we 'uz mos' down to de head er de islan' 
a man begin to come aft wid de lantern, i see it warn't no use fer to 
wait, so i slid overboard en struck out fer de islan'. well, i had a 
notion i could lan' mos' anywhers, but i couldn't-bank too bluff. i 'uz 
mos' to de foot er de islan' b'fo' i found' a good place. i went into de 
woods en jedged i wouldn' fool wid raffs no mo', long as dey move de 
lantern roun' so. i had my pipe en a plug er dog-leg, en some matches in 
my cap, en dey warn't wet, so i 'uz all right." 
"and so you ain't had no meat nor bread to eat all this time? why didn't 
you get mud-turkles?" 
"how you gwyne to git 'm? you can't slip up on um en grab um; en how's a 
body gwyne to hit um wid a rock? how could a body do it in de night? en 
i warn't gwyne to show mysef on de bank in de daytime." 
"well, that's so. you've had to keep in the woods all the time, of 
course. did you hear 'em shooting the cannon?" 
"oh, yes. i knowed dey was arter you. i see um go by heah-watched um 
thoo de bushes." 
some young birds come along, flying a yard or two at a time and lighting. 
jim said it was a sign it was going to rain. he said it was a sign when 
young chickens flew that way, and so he reckoned it was the same way when 
young birds done it. i was going to catch some of them, but jim wouldn't 
let me. he said it was death. he said his father laid mighty sick once, 
and some of them catched a bird, and his old granny said his father would 
die, and he did. 
and jim said you mustn't count the things you are going to cook for 
dinner, because that would bring bad luck. the same if you shook the 
table-cloth after sundown. and he said if a man owned a beehive and that 
man died, the bees must be told about it before sun-up next morning, or 
else the bees would all weaken down and quit work and die. jim said bees 
wouldn't sting idiots; but i didn't believe that, because i had tried 
them lots of times myself, and they wouldn't sting me. 
i had heard about some of these things before, but not all of them. jim 
knowed all kinds of signs. he said he knowed most everything. i said it 
looked to me like all the signs was about bad luck, and so i asked him if 
there warn't any good-luck signs. he says: 
"mighty few-an' dey ain't no use to a body. what you want to know when 
good luck's a-comin' for? want to keep it off?" and he said: "ef you's 
got hairy arms en a hairy breas', it's a sign dat you's agwyne to be 
rich. well, dey's some use in a sign like dat, 'kase it's so fur ahead. 
you see, maybe you's got to be po' a long time fust, en so you might git 
discourage' en kill yo'sef 'f you didn' know by de sign dat you gwyne to 
be rich bymeby." 
"have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast, jim?" 
"what's de use to ax dat question? don't you see i has?" 
"well, are you rich?" 
"no, but i ben rich wunst, and gwyne to be rich agin. wunst i had foteen 
dollars, but i tuck to specalat'n', en got busted out." 
"what did you speculate in, jim?" 
"well, fust i tackled stock." 
"what kind of stock?" 
"why, live stock-cattle, you know. i put ten dollars in a cow. but i 
ain' gwyne to resk no mo' money in stock. de cow up 'n' died on my 
han's." 
"so you lost the ten dollars." 
"no, i didn't lose it all. i on'y los' 'bout nine of it. i sole de hide 
en taller for a dollar en ten cents." 
"you had five dollars and ten cents left. did you speculate any more?" 
"yes. you know that one-laigged nigger dat b'longs to old misto bradish? 
well, he sot up a bank, en say anybody dat put in a dollar would git fo' 
dollars mo' at de en' er de year. well, all de niggers went in, but dey 
didn't have much. i wuz de on'y one dat had much. so i stuck out for 
mo' dan fo' dollars, en i said 'f i didn' git it i'd start a bank mysef. 
well, o' course dat nigger want' to keep me out er de business, bekase he 
says dey warn't business 'nough for two banks, so he say i could put in 
my five dollars en he pay me thirty-five at de en' er de year. 
"so i done it. den i reck'n'd i'd inves' de thirty-five dollars right 
off en keep things a-movin'. dey wuz a nigger name' bob, dat had ketched 
a wood-flat, en his marster didn' know it; en i bought it off'n him en 
told him to take de thirty-five dollars when de en' er de year come; but 
somebody stole de wood-flat dat night, en nex day de one-laigged nigger 
say de bank's busted. so dey didn' none uv us git no money." 
"what did you do with the ten cents, jim?" 
"well, i 'uz gwyne to spen' it, but i had a dream, en de dream tole me to 
give it to a nigger name' balum-balum's ass dey call him for short; he's 
one er dem chuckleheads, you know. but he's lucky, dey say, en i see i 
warn't lucky. de dream say let balum inves' de ten cents en he'd make a 
raise for me. well, balum he tuck de money, en when he wuz in church he 
hear de preacher say dat whoever give to de po' len' to de lord, en boun' 
to git his money back a hund'd times. so balum he tuck en give de ten 
cents to de po', en laid low to see what wuz gwyne to come of it." 
"well, what did come of it, jim?" 
"nuffn never come of it. i couldn' manage to k'leck dat money no way; en 
balum he couldn'. i ain' gwyne to len' no mo' money 'dout i see de 
security. boun' to git yo' money back a hund'd times, de preacher says! 
ef i could git de ten cents back, i'd call it squah, en be glad er de 
chanst." 
"well, it's all right anyway, jim, long as you're going to be rich again 
some time or other." 
"yes; en i's rich now, come to look at it. i owns mysef, en i's wuth 
eight hund'd dollars. i wisht i had de money, i wouldn' want no mo'." 
chapter ix. 
i wanted to go and look at a place right about the middle of the island 
that i'd found when i was exploring; so we started and soon got to it, 
because the island was only three miles long and a quarter of a mile 
wide. 
this place was a tolerable long, steep hill or ridge about forty foot 
high. we had a rough time getting to the top, the sides was so steep and 
the bushes so thick. we tramped and clumb around all over it, and by and 
by found a good big cavern in the rock, most up to the top on the side 
towards illinois. the cavern was as big as two or three rooms bunched 
together, and jim could stand up straight in it. it was cool in there. 
jim was for putting our traps in there right away, but i said we didn't 
want to be climbing up and down there all the time. 
jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place, and had all the traps 
in the cavern, we could rush there if anybody was to come to the island, 
and they would never find us without dogs. and, besides, he said them 
little birds had said it was going to rain, and did i want the things to 
get wet? 
so we went back and got the canoe, and paddled up abreast the cavern, and 
lugged all the traps up there. then we hunted up a place close by to 
hide the canoe in, amongst the thick willows. we took some fish off of 
the lines and set them again, and begun to get ready for dinner. 
the door of the cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead in, and on one 
side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit, and was flat and a 
good place to build a fire on. so we built it there and cooked dinner. 
we spread the blankets inside for a carpet, and eat our dinner in there. 
we put all the other things handy at the back of the cavern. pretty soon 
it darkened up, and begun to thunder and lighten; so the birds was right 
about it. directly it begun to rain, and it rained like all fury, too, 
and i never see the wind blow so. it was one of these regular summer 
storms. it would get so dark that it looked all blue-black outside, and 
lovely; and the rain would thrash along by so thick that the trees off a 
little ways looked dim and spider-webby; and here would come a blast of 
wind that would bend the trees down and turn up the pale underside of the 
leaves; and then a perfect ripper of a gust would follow along and set 
the branches to tossing their arms as if they was just wild; and next, 
when it was just about the bluest and blackest-fst! it was as bright as 
glory, and you'd have a little glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging about away 
off yonder in the storm, hundreds of yards further than you could see 
before; dark as sin again in a second, and now you'd hear the thunder let 
go with an awful crash, and then go rumbling, grumbling, tumbling, down 
the sky towards the under side of the world, like rolling empty barrels 
down stairs-where it's long stairs and they bounce a good deal, you 
know. 
"jim, this is nice," i says. "i wouldn't want to be nowhere else but 
here. pass me along another hunk of fish and some hot corn-bread." 
"well, you wouldn't a ben here 'f it hadn't a ben for jim. you'd a ben 
down dah in de woods widout any dinner, en gittn' mos' drownded, too; dat 
you would, honey. chickens knows when it's gwyne to rain, en so do de 
birds, chile." 
the river went on raising and raising for ten or twelve days, till at 
last it was over the banks. the water was three or four foot deep on the 
island in the low places and on the illinois bottom. on that side it was 
a good many miles wide, but on the missouri side it was the same old 
distance across-a half a mile-because the missouri shore was just a 
wall of high bluffs. 
daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe, it was mighty cool 
and shady in the deep woods, even if the sun was blazing outside. we 
went winding in and out amongst the trees, and sometimes the vines hung 
so thick we had to back away and go some other way. well, on every old 
broken-down tree you could see rabbits and snakes and such things; and 
when the island had been overflowed a day or two they got so tame, on 
account of being hungry, that you could paddle right up and put your hand 
on them if you wanted to; but not the snakes and turtles-they would 
slide off in the water. the ridge our cavern was in was full of them. 
we could a had pets enough if we'd wanted them. 
one night we catched a little section of a lumber raft-nice pine planks. 
it was twelve foot wide and about fifteen or sixteen foot long, and the 
top stood above water six or seven inches-a solid, level floor. we 
could see saw-logs go by in the daylight sometimes, but we let them go; 
we didn't show ourselves in daylight. 
another night when we was up at the head of the island, just before 
daylight, here comes a frame-house down, on the west side. she was a 
two-story, and tilted over considerable. we paddled out and got aboard 
clumb in at an upstairs window. but it was too dark to see yet, so we 
made the canoe fast and set in her to wait for daylight. 
the light begun to come before we got to the foot of the island. then we 
looked in at the window. we could make out a bed, and a table, and two 
old chairs, and lots of things around about on the floor, and there was 
clothes hanging against the wall. there was something laying on the 
floor in the far corner that looked like a man. so jim says: 
"hello, you!" 
but it didn't budge. so i hollered again, and then jim says: 
"de man ain't asleep-he's dead. you hold still-i'll go en see." 
he went, and bent down and looked, and says: 
"it's a dead man. yes, indeedy; naked, too. he's ben shot in de back. 
i reck'n he's ben dead two er three days. come in, huck, but doan' look 
at his face-it's too gashly." 
i didn't look at him at all. jim throwed some old rags over him, but he 
needn't done it; i didn't want to see him. there was heaps of old greasy 
cards scattered around over the floor, and old whisky bottles, and a 
couple of masks made out of black cloth; and all over the walls was the 
ignorantest kind of words and pictures made with charcoal. there was two 
old dirty calico dresses, and a sun-bonnet, and some women's underclothes 
hanging against the wall, and some men's clothing, too. we put the lot 
into the canoe-it might come good. there was a boy's old speckled straw 
hat on the floor; i took that, too. and there was a bottle that had had 
milk in it, and it had a rag stopper for a baby to suck. we would a took 
the bottle, but it was broke. there was a seedy old chest, and an old 
hair trunk with the hinges broke. they stood open, but there warn't 
nothing left in them that was any account. the way things was scattered 
about we reckoned the people left in a hurry, and warn't fixed so as to 
carry off most of their stuff. 
we got an old tin lantern, and a butcher-knife without any handle, and a 
bran-new barlow knife worth two bits in any store, and a lot of tallow 
candles, and a tin candlestick, and a gourd, and a tin cup, and a ratty 
old bedquilt off the bed, and a reticule with needles and pins and 
beeswax and buttons and thread and all such truck in it, and a hatchet 
and some nails, and a fishline as thick as my little finger with some 
monstrous hooks on it, and a roll of buckskin, and a leather dog-collar, 
and a horseshoe, and some vials of medicine that didn't have no label on 
them; and just as we was leaving i found a tolerable good curry-comb, and 
jim he found a ratty old fiddle-bow, and a wooden leg. the straps was 
broke off of it, but, barring that, it was a good enough leg, though it 
was too long for me and not long enough for jim, and we couldn't find the 
other one, though we hunted all around. 
and so, take it all around, we made a good haul. when we was ready to 
shove off we was a quarter of a mile below the island, and it was pretty 
broad day; so i made jim lay down in the canoe and cover up with the 
quilt, because if he set up people could tell he was a nigger a good ways 
off. i paddled over to the illinois shore, and drifted down most a half 
a mile doing it. i crept up the dead water under the bank, and hadn't no 
accidents and didn't see nobody. we got home all safe. 
chapter x. 
after breakfast i wanted to talk about the dead man and guess out how he 
come to be killed, but jim didn't want to. he said it would fetch bad 
luck; and besides, he said, he might come and ha'nt us; he said a man 
that warn't buried was more likely to go a-ha'nting around than one that 
was planted and comfortable. that sounded pretty reasonable, so i didn't 
say no more; but i couldn't keep from studying over it and wishing i 
knowed who shot the man, and what they done it for. 
we rummaged the clothes we'd got, and found eight dollars in silver sewed 
up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat. jim said he reckoned the 
people in that house stole the coat, because if they'd a knowed the money 
was there they wouldn't a left it. i said i reckoned they killed him, 
too; but jim didn't want to talk about that. i says: 
"now you think it's bad luck; but what did you say when i fetched in the 
snake-skin that i found on the top of the ridge day before yesterday? 
you said it was the worst bad luck in the world to touch a snake-skin 
with my hands. well, here's your bad luck! we've raked in all this 
truck and eight dollars besides. i wish we could have some bad luck like 
this every day, jim." 
"never you mind, honey, never you mind. don't you git too peart. it's 
a-comin'. mind i tell you, it's a-comin'." 
it did come, too. it was a tuesday that we had that talk. well, after 
dinner friday we was laying around in the grass at the upper end of the 
ridge, and got out of tobacco. i went to the cavern to get some, and 
found a rattlesnake in there. i killed him, and curled him up on the 
foot of jim's blanket, ever so natural, thinking there'd be some fun when 
jim found him there. well, by night i forgot all about the snake, and 
when jim flung himself down on the blanket while i struck a light the 
snake's mate was there, and bit him. 
he jumped up yelling, and the first thing the light showed was the 
varmint curled up and ready for another spring. i laid him out in a 
second with a stick, and jim grabbed pap's whisky-jug and begun to pour 
it down. 
he was barefooted, and the snake bit him right on the heel. that all 
comes of my being such a fool as to not remember that wherever you leave 
a dead snake its mate always comes there and curls around it. jim told 
me to chop off the snake's head and throw it away, and then skin the body 
and roast a piece of it. i done it, and he eat it and said it would help 
cure him. he made me take off the rattles and tie them around his wrist, 
too. he said that that would help. then i slid out quiet and throwed 
the snakes clear away amongst the bushes; for i warn't going to let jim 
find out it was all my fault, not if i could help it. 
jim sucked and sucked at the jug, and now and then he got out of his head 
and pitched around and yelled; but every time he come to himself he went 
to sucking at the jug again. his foot swelled up pretty big, and so did 
his leg; but by and by the drunk begun to come, and so i judged he was 
all right; but i'd druther been bit with a snake than pap's whisky. 
jim was laid up for four days and nights. then the swelling was all gone 
and he was around again. i made up my mind i wouldn't ever take a-holt 
of a snake-skin again with my hands, now that i see what had come of it. 
jim said he reckoned i would believe him next time. and he said that 
handling a snake-skin was such awful bad luck that maybe we hadn't got to 
the end of it yet. he said he druther see the new moon over his left 
shoulder as much as a thousand times than take up a snake-skin in his 
hand. well, i was getting to feel that way myself, though i've always 
reckoned that looking at the new moon over your left shoulder is one of 
the carelessest and foolishest things a body can do. old hank bunker 
done it once, and bragged about it; and in less than two years he got 
drunk and fell off of the shot-tower, and spread himself out so that he 
was just a kind of a layer, as you may say; and they slid him edgeways 
between two barn doors for a coffin, and buried him so, so they say, but 
i didn't see it. pap told me. but anyway it all come of looking at the 
moon that way, like a fool. 
well, the days went along, and the river went down between its banks 
again; and about the first thing we done was to bait one of the big hooks 
with a skinned rabbit and set it and catch a catfish that was as big as a 
man, being six foot two inches long, and weighed over two hundred pounds. 
we couldn't handle him, of course; he would a flung us into illinois. we 
just set there and watched him rip and tear around till he drownded. we 
found a brass button in his stomach and a round ball, and lots of 
rubbage. we split the ball open with the hatchet, and there was a spool 
in it. jim said he'd had it there a long time, to coat it over so and 
make a ball of it. it was as big a fish as was ever catched in the 
mississippi, i reckon. jim said he hadn't ever seen a bigger one. he 
would a been worth a good deal over at the village. they peddle out such 
a fish as that by the pound in the market-house there; everybody buys 
some of him; his meat's as white as snow and makes a good fry. 
next morning i said it was getting slow and dull, and i wanted to get a 
stirring up some way. i said i reckoned i would slip over the river and 
find out what was going on. jim liked that notion; but he said i must go 
in the dark and look sharp. then he studied it over and said, couldn't i 
put on some of them old things and dress up like a girl? that was a good 
notion, too. so we shortened up one of the calico gowns, and i turned up 
my trouser-legs to my knees and got into it. jim hitched it behind with 
the hooks, and it was a fair fit. i put on the sun-bonnet and tied it 
under my chin, and then for a body to look in and see my face was like 
looking down a joint of stove-pipe. jim said nobody would know me, even 
in the daytime, hardly. i practiced around all day to get the hang of 
the things, and by and by i could do pretty well in them, only jim said i 
didn't walk like a girl; and he said i must quit pulling up my gown to 
get at my britches-pocket. i took notice, and done better. 
i started up the illinois shore in the canoe just after dark. 
i started across to the town from a little below the ferry-landing, and 
the drift of the current fetched me in at the bottom of the town. i tied 
up and started along the bank. there was a light burning in a little 
shanty that hadn't been lived in for a long time, and i wondered who had 
took up quarters there. i slipped up and peeped in at the window. there 
was a woman about forty year old in there knitting by a candle that was 
on a pine table. i didn't know her face; she was a stranger, for you 
couldn't start a face in that town that i didn't know. now this was 
lucky, because i was weakening; i was getting afraid i had come; people 
might know my voice and find me out. but if this woman had been in such 
a little town two days she could tell me all i wanted to know; so i 
knocked at the door, and made up my mind i wouldn't forget i was a girl. 
chapter xi. 
"come in," says the woman, and i did. she says: "take a cheer." 
i done it. she looked me all over with her little shiny eyes, and says: 
"what might your name be?" 
"sarah williams." 
"where 'bouts do you live? in this neighborhood?' 
"no'm. in hookerville, seven mile below. i've walked all the way and 
i'm all tired out." 
"hungry, too, i reckon. i'll find you something." 
"no'm, i ain't hungry. i was so hungry i had to stop two miles below 
here at a farm; so i ain't hungry no more. it's what makes me so late. 
my mother's down sick, and out of money and everything, and i come to 
tell my uncle abner moore. he lives at the upper end of the town, she 
says. i hain't ever been here before. do you know him?" 
"no; but i don't know everybody yet. i haven't lived here quite two 
weeks. it's a considerable ways to the upper end of the town. you better 
stay here all night. take off your bonnet." 
"no," i says; "i'll rest a while, i reckon, and go on. i ain't afeared 
of the dark." 
she said she wouldn't let me go by myself, but her husband would be in by 
and by, maybe in a hour and a half, and she'd send him along with me. 
then she got to talking about her husband, and about her relations up the 
river, and her relations down the river, and about how much better off 
they used to was, and how they didn't know but they'd made a mistake 
coming to our town, instead of letting well alone-and so on and so on, 
till i was afeard i had made a mistake coming to her to find out what was 
going on in the town; but by and by she dropped on to pap and the murder, 
and then i was pretty willing to let her clatter right along. she told 
about me and tom sawyer finding the six thousand dollars (only she got it 
ten) and all about pap and what a hard lot he was, and what a hard lot i 
was, and at last she got down to where i was murdered. i says: 
"who done it? we've heard considerable about these goings on down in 
hookerville, but we don't know who 'twas that killed huck finn." 
"well, i reckon there's a right smart chance of people here that'd like 
to know who killed him. some think old finn done it himself." 
"no-is that so?" 
"most everybody thought it at first. he'll never know how nigh he come 
to getting lynched. but before night they changed around and judged it 
was done by a runaway nigger named jim." 
"why he-" 
i stopped. i reckoned i better keep still. she run on, and never 
noticed i had put in at all: 
"the nigger run off the very night huck finn was killed. so there's a 
reward out for him-three hundred dollars. and there's a reward out for 
old finn, too-two hundred dollars. you see, he come to town the morning 
after the murder, and told about it, and was out with 'em on the 
ferryboat hunt, and right away after he up and left. before night they 
wanted to lynch him, but he was gone, you see. well, next day they found 
out the nigger was gone; they found out he hadn't ben seen sence ten 
o'clock the night the murder was done. so then they put it on him, you 
see; and while they was full of it, next day, back comes old finn, and 
went boo-hooing to judge thatcher to get money to hunt for the nigger all 
over illinois with. the judge gave him some, and that evening he got 
drunk, and was around till after midnight with a couple of mighty 
hard-looking strangers, and then went off with them. well, he hain't 
come back sence, and they ain't looking for him back till this thing 
blows over a little, for people thinks now that he killed his boy and 
fixed things so folks would think robbers done it, and then he'd get 
huck's money without having to bother a long time with a lawsuit. people 
do say he warn't any too good to do it. oh, he's sly, i reckon. if he 
don't come back for a year he'll be all right. you can't prove anything 
on him, you know; everything will be quieted down then, and he'll walk in 
huck's money as easy as nothing." 
"yes, i reckon so, 'm. i don't see nothing in the way of it. has 
everybody quit thinking the nigger done it?" 
"oh, no, not everybody. a good many thinks he done it. but they'll get 
the nigger pretty soon now, and maybe they can scare it out of him." 
"why, are they after him yet?" 
"well, you're innocent, ain't you! does three hundred dollars lay around 
every day for people to pick up? some folks think the nigger ain't far 
from here. i'm one of them-but i hain't talked it around. a few days 
ago i was talking with an old couple that lives next door in the log 
shanty, and they happened to say hardly anybody ever goes to that island 
over yonder that they call jackson's island. don't anybody live there? 
says i. no, nobody, says they. i didn't say any more, but i done some 
thinking. i was pretty near certain i'd seen smoke over there, about the 
head of the island, a day or two before that, so i says to myself, like 
as not that nigger's hiding over there; anyway, says i, it's worth the 
trouble to give the place a hunt. i hain't seen any smoke sence, so i 
reckon maybe he's gone, if it was him; but husband's going over to see 
him and another man. he was gone up the river; but he got back to-day, 
and i told him as soon as he got here two hours ago." 
i had got so uneasy i couldn't set still. i had to do something with my 
hands; so i took up a needle off of the table and went to threading it. 
my hands shook, and i was making a bad job of it. when the woman stopped 
talking i looked up, and she was looking at me pretty curious and smiling 
a little. i put down the needle and thread, and let on to be interested 
and i was, too-and says: 
"three hundred dollars is a power of money. i wish my mother could get 
it. is your husband going over there to-night?" 
"oh, yes. he went up-town with the man i was telling you of, to get a 
boat and see if they could borrow another gun. they'll go over after 
midnight." 
"couldn't they see better if they was to wait till daytime?" 
"yes. and couldn't the nigger see better, too? after midnight he'll 
likely be asleep, and they can slip around through the woods and hunt up 
his camp fire all the better for the dark, if he's got one." 
"i didn't think of that." 
the woman kept looking at me pretty curious, and i didn't feel a bit 
comfortable. pretty soon she says, 
"what did you say your name was, honey?" 
"m-mary williams." 
somehow it didn't seem to me that i said it was mary before, so i didn't 
look up-seemed to me i said it was sarah; so i felt sort of cornered, 
and was afeared maybe i was looking it, too. i wished the woman would 
say something more; the longer she set still the uneasier i was. but now 
she says: 
"honey, i thought you said it was sarah when you first come in?" 
"oh, yes'm, i did. sarah mary williams. sarah's my first name. some 
calls me sarah, some calls me mary." 
"oh, that's the way of it?" 
"yes'm." 
i was feeling better then, but i wished i was out of there, anyway. i 
couldn't look up yet. 
well, the woman fell to talking about how hard times was, and how poor 
they had to live, and how the rats was as free as if they owned the 
place, and so forth and so on, and then i got easy again. she was right 
about the rats. you'd see one stick his nose out of a hole in the corner 
every little while. she said she had to have things handy to throw at 
them when she was alone, or they wouldn't give her no peace. she showed 
me a bar of lead twisted up into a knot, and said she was a good shot 
with it generly, but she'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago, and didn't 
know whether she could throw true now. but she watched for a chance, and 
directly banged away at a rat; but she missed him wide, and said "ouch!" 
it hurt her arm so. then she told me to try for the next one. i wanted 
to be getting away before the old man got back, but of course i didn't 
let on. i got the thing, and the first rat that showed his nose i let 
drive, and if he'd a stayed where he was he'd a been a tolerable sick 
rat. she said that was first-rate, and she reckoned i would hive the 
next one. she went and got the lump of lead and fetched it back, and 
brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help her with. i 
held up my two hands and she put the hank over them, and went on talking 
about her and her husband's matters. but she broke off to say: 
"keep your eye on the rats. you better have the lead in your lap, 
handy." 
so she dropped the lump into my lap just at that moment, and i clapped my 
legs together on it and she went on talking. but only about a minute. 
then she took off the hank and looked me straight in the face, and very 
pleasant, and says: 
"come, now, what's your real name?" 
"wh-what, mum?" 
"what's your real name? is it bill, or tom, or bob?-or what is it?" 
i reckon i shook like a leaf, and i didn't know hardly what to do. but i 
says: 
"please to don't poke fun at a poor girl like me, mum. if i'm in the way 
here, i'll-" 
"no, you won't. set down and stay where you are. i ain't going to hurt 
you, and i ain't going to tell on you, nuther. you just tell me your 
secret, and trust me. i'll keep it; and, what's more, i'll help you. 
so'll my old man if you want him to. you see, you're a runaway 
'prentice, that's all. it ain't anything. there ain't no harm in it. 
you've been treated bad, and you made up your mind to cut. bless you, 
child, i wouldn't tell on you. tell me all about it now, that's a good 
boy." 
so i said it wouldn't be no use to try to play it any longer, and i would 
just make a clean breast and tell her everything, but she musn't go back 
on her promise. then i told her my father and mother was dead, and the 
law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in the country thirty mile back 
from the river, and he treated me so bad i couldn't stand it no longer; 
he went away to be gone a couple of days, and so i took my chance and 
stole some of his daughter's old clothes and cleared out, and i had been 
three nights coming the thirty miles. i traveled nights, and hid 
daytimes and slept, and the bag of bread and meat i carried from home 
lasted me all the way, and i had a-plenty. i said i believed my uncle 
abner moore would take care of me, and so that was why i struck out for 
this town of goshen. 
"goshen, child? this ain't goshen. this is st. petersburg. goshen's 
ten mile further up the river. who told you this was goshen?" 
"why, a man i met at daybreak this morning, just as i was going to turn 
into the woods for my regular sleep. he told me when the roads forked i 
must take the right hand, and five mile would fetch me to goshen." 
"he was drunk, i reckon. he told you just exactly wrong." 
"well, he did act like he was drunk, but it ain't no matter now. i got 
to be moving along. i'll fetch goshen before daylight." 
"hold on a minute. i'll put you up a snack to eat. you might want it." 
so she put me up a snack, and says: 
"say, when a cow's laying down, which end of her gets up first? answer 
up prompt now-don't stop to study over it. which end gets up first?" 
"the hind end, mum." 
"well, then, a horse?" 
"the for'rard end, mum." 
"which side of a tree does the moss grow on?" 
"north side." 
"if fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside, how many of them eats with 
their heads pointed the same direction?" 
"the whole fifteen, mum." 
"well, i reckon you have lived in the country. i thought maybe you was 
trying to hocus me again. what's your real name, now?" 
"george peters, mum." 
"well, try to remember it, george. don't forget and tell me it's 
elexander before you go, and then get out by saying it's george elexander 
when i catch you. and don't go about women in that old calico. you do a 
girl tolerable poor, but you might fool men, maybe. bless you, child, 
when you set out to thread a needle don't hold the thread still and fetch 
the needle up to it; hold the needle still and poke the thread at it; 
that's the way a woman most always does, but a man always does t'other 
way. and when you throw at a rat or anything, hitch yourself up a tiptoe 
and fetch your hand up over your head as awkward as you can, and miss 
your rat about six or seven foot. throw stiff-armed from the shoulder, 
like there was a pivot there for it to turn on, like a girl; not from the 
wrist and elbow, with your arm out to one side, like a boy. and, mind 
you, when a girl tries to catch anything in her lap she throws her knees 
apart; she don't clap them together, the way you did when you catched the 
lump of lead. why, i spotted you for a boy when you was threading the 
needle; and i contrived the other things just to make certain. now trot 
along to your uncle, sarah mary williams george elexander peters, and if 
you get into trouble you send word to mrs. judith loftus, which is me, 
and i'll do what i can to get you out of it. keep the river road all the 
way, and next time you tramp take shoes and socks with you. the river 
road's a rocky one, and your feet'll be in a condition when you get to 
goshen, i reckon." 
i went up the bank about fifty yards, and then i doubled on my tracks and 
slipped back to where my canoe was, a good piece below the house. i 
jumped in, and was off in a hurry. i went up-stream far enough to make 
the head of the island, and then started across. i took off the 
sun-bonnet, for i didn't want no blinders on then. when i was about the 
middle i heard the clock begin to strike, so i stops and listens; the 
sound come faint over the water but clear-eleven. when i struck the 
head of the island i never waited to blow, though i was most winded, but 
i shoved right into the timber where my old camp used to be, and started 
a good fire there on a high and dry spot. 
then i jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place, a mile and a half 
below, as hard as i could go. i landed, and slopped through the timber 
and up the ridge and into the cavern. there jim laid, sound asleep on 
the ground. i roused him out and says: 
"git up and hump yourself, jim! there ain't a minute to lose. they're 
after us!" 
jim never asked no questions, he never said a word; but the way he worked 
for the next half an hour showed about how he was scared. by that time 
everything we had in the world was on our raft, and she was ready to be 
shoved out from the willow cove where she was hid. we put out the camp 
fire at the cavern the first thing, and didn't show a candle outside 
after that. 
i took the canoe out from the shore a little piece, and took a look; but 
if there was a boat around i couldn't see it, for stars and shadows ain't 
good to see by. then we got out the raft and slipped along down in the 
shade, past the foot of the island dead still-never saying a word. 
chapter xii. 
it must a been close on to one o'clock when we got below the island at 
last, and the raft did seem to go mighty slow. if a boat was to come 
along we was going to take to the canoe and break for the illinois shore; 
and it was well a boat didn't come, for we hadn't ever thought to put the 
gun in the canoe, or a fishing-line, or anything to eat. we was in 
ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things. it warn't good 
judgment to put everything on the raft. 
if the men went to the island i just expect they found the camp fire i 
built, and watched it all night for jim to come. anyways, they stayed 
away from us, and if my building the fire never fooled them it warn't no 
fault of mine. i played it as low down on them as i could. 
when the first streak of day began to show we tied up to a towhead in a 
big bend on the illinois side, and hacked off cottonwood branches with 
the hatchet, and covered up the raft with them so she looked like there 
had been a cave-in in the bank there. a tow-head is a sandbar that has 
cottonwoods on it as thick as harrow-teeth. 
we had mountains on the missouri shore and heavy timber on the illinois 
side, and the channel was down the missouri shore at that place, so we 
warn't afraid of anybody running across us. we laid there all day, and 
watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the missouri shore, and 
up-bound steamboats fight the big river in the middle. i told jim all 
about the time i had jabbering with that woman; and jim said she was a 
smart one, and if she was to start after us herself she wouldn't set down 
and watch a camp fire-no, sir, she'd fetch a dog. well, then, i said, 
why couldn't she tell her husband to fetch a dog? jim said he bet she 
did think of it by the time the men was ready to start, and he believed 
they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all that time, or 
else we wouldn't be here on a towhead sixteen or seventeen mile below the 
village-no, indeedy, we would be in that same old town again. so i said 
i didn't care what was the reason they didn't get us as long as they 
didn't. 
when it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the 
cottonwood thicket, and looked up and down and across; nothing in sight; 
so jim took up some of the top planks of the raft and built a snug wigwam 
to get under in blazing weather and rainy, and to keep the things dry. 
jim made a floor for the wigwam, and raised it a foot or more above the 
level of the raft, so now the blankets and all the traps was out of reach 
of steamboat waves. right in the middle of the wigwam we made a layer of 
dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for to hold it 
to its place; this was to build a fire on in sloppy weather or chilly; 
the wigwam would keep it from being seen. we made an extra steering-oar, 
too, because one of the others might get broke on a snag or something. 
we fixed up a short forked stick to hang the old lantern on, because we 
must always light the lantern whenever we see a steamboat coming 
down-stream, to keep from getting run over; but we wouldn't have to light 
it for up-stream boats unless we see we was in what they call a 
"crossing"; for the river was pretty high yet, very low banks being still 
a little under water; so up-bound boats didn't always run the channel, 
but hunted easy water. 
this second night we run between seven and eight hours, with a current 
that was making over four mile an hour. we catched fish and talked, and 
we took a swim now and then to keep off sleepiness. it was kind of 
solemn, drifting down the big, still river, laying on our backs looking 
up at the stars, and we didn't ever feel like talking loud, and it warn't 
often that we laughed-only a little kind of a low chuckle. we had 
mighty good weather as a general thing, and nothing ever happened to us 
at all-that night, nor the next, nor the next. 
every night we passed towns, some of them away up on black hillsides, 
nothing but just a shiny bed of lights; not a house could you see. the 
fifth night we passed st. louis, and it was like the whole world lit up. 
in st. petersburg they used to say there was twenty or thirty thousand 
people in st. louis, but i never believed it till i see that wonderful 
spread of lights at two o'clock that still night. there warn't a sound 
there; everybody was asleep. 
every night now i used to slip ashore towards ten o'clock at some little 
village, and buy ten or fifteen cents' worth of meal or bacon or other 
stuff to eat; and sometimes i lifted a chicken that warn't roosting 
comfortable, and took him along. pap always said, take a chicken when 
you get a chance, because if you don't want him yourself you can easy 
find somebody that does, and a good deed ain't ever forgot. i never see 
pap when he didn't want the chicken himself, but that is what he used to 
say, anyway. 
mornings before daylight i slipped into cornfields and borrowed a 
watermelon, or a mushmelon, or a punkin, or some new corn, or things of 
that kind. pap always said it warn't no harm to borrow things if you was 
meaning to pay them back some time; but the widow said it warn't anything 
but a soft name for stealing, and no decent body would do it. jim said 
he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly right; so the 
best way would be for us to pick out two or three things from the list 
and say we wouldn't borrow them any more-then he reckoned it wouldn't be 
no harm to borrow the others. so we talked it over all one night, 
drifting along down the river, trying to make up our minds whether to 
drop the watermelons, or the cantelopes, or the mushmelons, or what. but 
towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory, and concluded to 
drop crabapples and p'simmons. we warn't feeling just right before that, 
but it was all comfortable now. i was glad the way it come out, too, 
because crabapples ain't ever good, and the p'simmons wouldn't be ripe 
for two or three months yet. 
we shot a water-fowl now and then that got up too early in the morning or 
didn't go to bed early enough in the evening. take it all round, we 
lived pretty high. 
the fifth night below st. louis we had a big storm after midnight, with a 
power of thunder and lightning, and the rain poured down in a solid 
sheet. we stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself. 
when the lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead, 
and high, rocky bluffs on both sides. by and by says i, "hel-lo, jim, 
looky yonder!" it was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock. we 
was drifting straight down for her. the lightning showed her very 
distinct. she was leaning over, with part of her upper deck above water, 
and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear, and a chair 
by the big bell, with an old slouch hat hanging on the back of it, when 
the flashes come. 
well, it being away in the night and stormy, and all so mysterious-like, 
i felt just the way any other boy would a felt when i see that wreck 
laying there so mournful and lonesome in the middle of the river. i 
wanted to get aboard of her and slink around a little, and see what there 
was there. so i says: 
"le's land on her, jim." 
but jim was dead against it at first. he says: 
"i doan' want to go fool'n 'long er no wrack. we's doin' blame' well, en 
we better let blame' well alone, as de good book says. like as not dey's 
a watchman on dat wrack." 
"watchman your grandmother," i says; "there ain't nothing to watch but 
the texas and the pilot-house; and do you reckon anybody's going to resk 
his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this, when it's 
likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute?" jim couldn't 
say nothing to that, so he didn't try. "and besides," i says, "we might 
borrow something worth having out of the captain's stateroom. seegars, i 
bet you-and cost five cents apiece, solid cash. steamboat captains is 
always rich, and get sixty dollars a month, and they don't care a cent 
what a thing costs, you know, long as they want it. stick a candle in 
your pocket; i can't rest, jim, till we give her a rummaging. do you 
reckon tom sawyer would ever go by this thing? not for pie, he wouldn't. 
he'd call it an adventure-that's what he'd call it; and he'd land on 
that wreck if it was his last act. and wouldn't he throw style into it? 
wouldn't he spread himself, nor nothing? why, you'd think it was 
christopher c'lumbus discovering kingdom-come. i wish tom sawyer was 
here." 
jim he grumbled a little, but give in. he said we mustn't talk any more 
than we could help, and then talk mighty low. the lightning showed us 
the wreck again just in time, and we fetched the stabboard derrick, and 
made fast there. 
the deck was high out here. we went sneaking down the slope of it to 
labboard, in the dark, towards the texas, feeling our way slow with our 
feet, and spreading our hands out to fend off the guys, for it was so 
dark we couldn't see no sign of them. pretty soon we struck the forward 
end of the skylight, and clumb on to it; and the next step fetched us in 
front of the captain's door, which was open, and by jimminy, away down 
through the texas-hall we see a light! and all in the same second we seem 
to hear low voices in yonder! 
jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick, and told me to come 
along. i says, all right, and was going to start for the raft; but just 
then i heard a voice wail out and say: 
"oh, please don't, boys; i swear i won't ever tell!" 
another voice said, pretty loud: 
"it's a lie, jim turner. you've acted this way before. you always want 
more'n your share of the truck, and you've always got it, too, because 
you've swore 't if you didn't you'd tell. but this time you've said it 
jest one time too many. you're the meanest, treacherousest hound in this 
country." 
by this time jim was gone for the raft. i was just a-biling with 
curiosity; and i says to myself, tom sawyer wouldn't back out now, and so 
i won't either; i'm a-going to see what's going on here. so i dropped on 
my hands and knees in the little passage, and crept aft in the dark till 
there warn't but one stateroom betwixt me and the cross-hall of the 
texas. then in there i see a man stretched on the floor and tied hand 
and foot, and two men standing over him, and one of them had a dim 
lantern in his hand, and the other one had a pistol. this one kept 
pointing the pistol at the man's head on the floor, and saying: 
"i'd like to! and i orter, too-a mean skunk!" 
the man on the floor would shrivel up and say, "oh, please don't, bill; i 
hain't ever goin' to tell." 
and every time he said that the man with the lantern would laugh and say: 
"'deed you ain't! you never said no truer thing 'n that, you bet you." 
and once he said: "hear him beg! and yit if we hadn't got the best of 
him and tied him he'd a killed us both. and what for? jist for noth'n. 
jist because we stood on our rights-that's what for. but i lay you 
ain't a-goin' to threaten nobody any more, jim turner. put up that 
pistol, bill." 
bill says: 
"i don't want to, jake packard. i'm for killin' him-and didn't he kill 
old hatfield jist the same way-and don't he deserve it?" 
"but i don't want him killed, and i've got my reasons for it." 
"bless yo' heart for them words, jake packard! i'll never forgit you 
long's i live!" says the man on the floor, sort of blubbering. 
packard didn't take no notice of that, but hung up his lantern on a nail 
and started towards where i was there in the dark, and motioned bill to 
come. i crawfished as fast as i could about two yards, but the boat 
slanted so that i couldn't make very good time; so to keep from getting 
run over and catched i crawled into a stateroom on the upper side. the 
man came a-pawing along in the dark, and when packard got to my 
stateroom, he says: 
"here-come in here." 
and in he come, and bill after him. but before they got in i was up in 
the upper berth, cornered, and sorry i come. then they stood there, with 
their hands on the ledge of the berth, and talked. i couldn't see them, 
but i could tell where they was by the whisky they'd been having. i was 
glad i didn't drink whisky; but it wouldn't made much difference anyway, 
because most of the time they couldn't a treed me because i didn't 
breathe. i was too scared. and, besides, a body couldn't breathe and 
hear such talk. they talked low and earnest. bill wanted to kill 
turner. he says: 
"he's said he'll tell, and he will. if we was to give both our shares to 
him now it wouldn't make no difference after the row and the way we've 
served him. shore's you're born, he'll turn state's evidence; now you 
hear me. i'm for putting him out of his troubles." 
"so'm i," says packard, very quiet. 
"blame it, i'd sorter begun to think you wasn't. well, then, that's all 
right. le's go and do it." 
"hold on a minute; i hain't had my say yit. you listen to me. 
shooting's good, but there's quieter ways if the thing's got to be done. 
but what i say is this: it ain't good sense to go court'n around after a 
halter if you can git at what you're up to in some way that's jist as 
good and at the same time don't bring you into no resks. ain't that so?" 
"you bet it is. but how you goin' to manage it this time?" 
"well, my idea is this: we'll rustle around and gather up whatever 
pickins we've overlooked in the staterooms, and shove for shore and hide 
the truck. then we'll wait. now i say it ain't a-goin' to be more'n two 
hours befo' this wrack breaks up and washes off down the river. see? 
he'll be drownded, and won't have nobody to blame for it but his own 
self. i reckon that's a considerble sight better 'n killin' of him. i'm 
unfavorable to killin' a man as long as you can git aroun' it; it ain't 
good sense, it ain't good morals. ain't i right?" 
"yes, i reck'n you are. but s'pose she don't break up and wash off?" 
"well, we can wait the two hours anyway and see, can't we?" 
"all right, then; come along." 
so they started, and i lit out, all in a cold sweat, and scrambled 
forward. it was dark as pitch there; but i said, in a kind of a coarse 
whisper, "jim!" and he answered up, right at my elbow, with a sort of a 
moan, and i says: 
"quick, jim, it ain't no time for fooling around and moaning; there's a 
gang of murderers in yonder, and if we don't hunt up their boat and set 
her drifting down the river so these fellows can't get away from the 
wreck there's one of 'em going to be in a bad fix. but if we find their 
boat we can put all of 'em in a bad fix-for the sheriff 'll get 'em. 
quick-hurry! i'll hunt the labboard side, you hunt the stabboard. 
you start at the raft, and-" 
"oh, my lordy, lordy! raf'? dey ain' no raf' no mo'; she done broke 
loose en gone i-en here we is!" 
chapter xiii. 
well, i catched my breath and most fainted. shut up on a wreck with such 
a gang as that! but it warn't no time to be sentimentering. we'd got to 
find that boat now-had to have it for ourselves. so we went a-quaking 
and shaking down the stabboard side, and slow work it was, too-seemed a 
week before we got to the stern. no sign of a boat. jim said he didn't 
believe he could go any further-so scared he hadn't hardly any strength 
left, he said. but i said, come on, if we get left on this wreck we are 
in a fix, sure. so on we prowled again. we struck for the stern of the 
texas, and found it, and then scrabbled along forwards on the skylight, 
hanging on from shutter to shutter, for the edge of the skylight was in 
the water. when we got pretty close to the cross-hall door there was the 
skiff, sure enough! i could just barely see her. i felt ever so 
thankful. in another second i would a been aboard of her, but just then 
the door opened. one of the men stuck his head out only about a couple 
of foot from me, and i thought i was gone; but he jerked it in again, and 
says: 
"heave that blame lantern out o' sight, bill!" 
he flung a bag of something into the boat, and then got in himself and 
set down. it was packard. then bill he come out and got in. packard 
says, in a low voice: 
"all ready-shove off!" 
i couldn't hardly hang on to the shutters, i was so weak. but bill says: 
"hold on-'d you go through him?" 
"no. didn't you?" 
"no. so he's got his share o' the cash yet." 
"well, then, come along; no use to take truck and leave money." 
"say, won't he suspicion what we're up to?" 
"maybe he won't. but we got to have it anyway. come along." 
so they got out and went in. 
the door slammed to because it was on the careened side; and in a half 
second i was in the boat, and jim come tumbling after me. i out with my 
knife and cut the rope, and away we went! 
we didn't touch an oar, and we didn't speak nor whisper, nor hardly even 
breathe. we went gliding swift along, dead silent, past the tip of the 
paddle-box, and past the stern; then in a second or two more we was a 
hundred yards below the wreck, and the darkness soaked her up, every last 
sign of her, and we was safe, and knowed it. 
when we was three or four hundred yards down-stream we see the lantern 
show like a little spark at the texas door for a second, and we knowed by 
that that the rascals had missed their boat, and was beginning to 
understand that they was in just as much trouble now as jim turner was. 
then jim manned the oars, and we took out after our raft. now was the 
first time that i begun to worry about the men-i reckon i hadn't had 
time to before. i begun to think how dreadful it was, even for 
murderers, to be in such a fix. i says to myself, there ain't no telling 
but i might come to be a murderer myself yet, and then how would i like 
it? so says i to jim: 
"the first light we see we'll land a hundred yards below it or above it, 
in a place where it's a good hiding-place for you and the skiff, and then 
i'll go and fix up some kind of a yarn, and get somebody to go for that 
gang and get them out of their scrape, so they can be hung when their 
time comes." 
but that idea was a failure; for pretty soon it begun to storm again, and 
this time worse than ever. the rain poured down, and never a light 
showed; everybody in bed, i reckon. we boomed along down the river, 
watching for lights and watching for our raft. after a long time the 
rain let up, but the clouds stayed, and the lightning kept whimpering, 
and by and by a flash showed us a black thing ahead, floating, and we 
made for it. 
it was the raft, and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again. we 
seen a light now away down to the right, on shore. so i said i would go 
for it. the skiff was half full of plunder which that gang had stole 
there on the wreck. we hustled it on to the raft in a pile, and i told 
jim to float along down, and show a light when he judged he had gone 
about two mile, and keep it burning till i come; then i manned my oars 
and shoved for the light. as i got down towards it three or four more 
showed-up on a hillside. it was a village. i closed in above the shore 
light, and laid on my oars and floated. as i went by i see it was a 
lantern hanging on the jackstaff of a double-hull ferryboat. i skimmed 
around for the watchman, a-wondering whereabouts he slept; and by and by 
i found him roosting on the bitts forward, with his head down between his 
knees. i gave his shoulder two or three little shoves, and begun to cry. 
he stirred up in a kind of a startlish way; but when he see it was only 
me he took a good gap and stretch, and then he says: 
"hello, what's up? don't cry, bub. what's the trouble?" 
i says: 
"pap, and mam, and sis, and-" 
then i broke down. he says: 
"oh, dang it now, don't take on so; we all has to have our troubles, and 
this 'n 'll come out all right. what's the matter with 'em?" 
"they're-they're-are you the watchman of the boat?" 
"yes," he says, kind of pretty-well-satisfied like. "i'm the captain and 
the owner and the mate and the pilot and watchman and head deck-hand; and 
sometimes i'm the freight and passengers. i ain't as rich as old jim 
hornback, and i can't be so blame' generous and good to tom, dick, and 
harry as what he is, and slam around money the way he does; but i've told 
him a many a time 't i wouldn't trade places with him; for, says i, a 
sailor's life's the life for me, and i'm derned if i'd live two mile out 
o' town, where there ain't nothing ever goin' on, not for all his 
spondulicks and as much more on top of it. says i-" 
i broke in and says: 
"they're in an awful peck of trouble, and-" 
"who is?" 
"why, pap and mam and sis and miss hooker; and if you'd take your 
ferryboat and go up there-" 
"up where? where are they?" 
"on the wreck." 
"what wreck?" 
"why, there ain't but one." 
"what, you don't mean the walter scott?" 
"yes." 
"good land! what are they doin' there, for gracious sakes?" 
"well, they didn't go there a-purpose." 
"i bet they didn't! why, great goodness, there ain't no chance for 'em 
if they don't git off mighty quick! why, how in the nation did they ever 
git into such a scrape?" 
"easy enough. miss hooker was a-visiting up there to the town-" 
"yes, booth's landing-go on." 
"she was a-visiting there at booth's landing, and just in the edge of the 
evening she started over with her nigger woman in the horse-ferry to stay 
all night at her friend's house, miss what-you-may-call-her i disremember 
her name-and they lost their steering-oar, and swung around and went 
a-floating down, stern first, about two mile, and saddle-baggsed on the 
wreck, and the ferryman and the nigger woman and the horses was all lost, 
but miss hooker she made a grab and got aboard the wreck. well, about an 
hour after dark we come along down in our trading-scow, and it was so 
dark we didn't notice the wreck till we was right on it; and so we 
saddle-baggsed; but all of us was saved but bill whipple-and oh, he was 
the best cretur!-i most wish 't it had been me, i do." 
"my george! it's the beatenest thing i ever struck. and then what did 
you all do?" 
"well, we hollered and took on, but it's so wide there we couldn't make 
nobody hear. so pap said somebody got to get ashore and get help 
somehow. i was the only one that could swim, so i made a dash for it, and 
miss hooker she said if i didn't strike help sooner, come here and hunt 
up her uncle, and he'd fix the thing. i made the land about a mile 
below, and been fooling along ever since, trying to get people to do 
something, but they said, 'what, in such a night and such a current? 
there ain't no sense in it; go for the steam ferry.' now if you'll go 
and-" 
"by jackson, i'd like to, and, blame it, i don't know but i will; but who 
in the dingnation's a-going' to pay for it? do you reckon your pap-" 
"why that's all right. miss hooker she tole me, particular, that her 
uncle hornback-" 
"great guns! is he her uncle? looky here, you break for that light over 
yonder-way, and turn out west when you git there, and about a quarter of 
a mile out you'll come to the tavern; tell 'em to dart you out to jim 
hornback's, and he'll foot the bill. and don't you fool around any, 
because he'll want to know the news. tell him i'll have his niece all 
safe before he can get to town. hump yourself, now; i'm a-going up 
around the corner here to roust out my engineer." 
i struck for the light, but as soon as he turned the corner i went back 
and got into my skiff and bailed her out, and then pulled up shore in the 
easy water about six hundred yards, and tucked myself in among some 
woodboats; for i couldn't rest easy till i could see the ferryboat start. 
but take it all around, i was feeling ruther comfortable on accounts of 
taking all this trouble for that gang, for not many would a done it. i 
wished the widow knowed about it. i judged she would be proud of me for 
helping these rapscallions, because rapscallions and dead beats is the 
kind the widow and good people takes the most interest in. 
well, before long here comes the wreck, dim and dusky, sliding along 
down! a kind of cold shiver went through me, and then i struck out for 
her. she was very deep, and i see in a minute there warn't much chance 
for anybody being alive in her. i pulled all around her and hollered a 
little, but there wasn't any answer; all dead still. i felt a little bit 
heavy-hearted about the gang, but not much, for i reckoned if they could 
stand it i could. 
then here comes the ferryboat; so i shoved for the middle of the river on 
a long down-stream slant; and when i judged i was out of eye-reach i laid 
on my oars, and looked back and see her go and smell around the wreck for 
miss hooker's remainders, because the captain would know her uncle 
hornback would want them; and then pretty soon the ferryboat give it up 
and went for the shore, and i laid into my work and went a-booming down 
the river. 
it did seem a powerful long time before jim's light showed up; and when 
it did show it looked like it was a thousand mile off. by the time i got 
there the sky was beginning to get a little gray in the east; so we 
struck for an island, and hid the raft, and sunk the skiff, and turned in 
and slept like dead people. 
chapter xiv. 
by and by, when we got up, we turned over the truck the gang had stole 
off of the wreck, and found boots, and blankets, and clothes, and all 
sorts of other things, and a lot of books, and a spyglass, and three 
boxes of seegars. we hadn't ever been this rich before in neither of our 
lives. the seegars was prime. we laid off all the afternoon in the 
woods talking, and me reading the books, and having a general good time. 
i told jim all about what happened inside the wreck and at the ferryboat, 
and i said these kinds of things was adventures; but he said he didn't 
want no more adventures. he said that when i went in the texas and he 
crawled back to get on the raft and found her gone he nearly died, 
because he judged it was all up with him anyway it could be fixed; for if 
he didn't get saved he would get drownded; and if he did get saved, 
whoever saved him would send him back home so as to get the reward, and 
then miss watson would sell him south, sure. well, he was right; he was 
most always right; he had an uncommon level head for a nigger. 
i read considerable to jim about kings and dukes and earls and such, and 
how gaudy they dressed, and how much style they put on, and called each 
other your majesty, and your grace, and your lordship, and so on, 'stead 
of mister; and jim's eyes bugged out, and he was interested. he says: 
"i didn' know dey was so many un um. i hain't hearn 'bout none un um, 
skasely, but ole king sollermun, onless you counts dem kings dat's in a 
pack er k'yards. how much do a king git?" 
"get?" i says; "why, they get a thousand dollars a month if they want 
it; they can have just as much as they want; everything belongs to them." 
"ain' dat gay? en what dey got to do, huck?" 
"they don't do nothing! why, how you talk! they just set around." 
"no; is dat so?" 
"of course it is. they just set around-except, maybe, when there's a 
war; then they go to the war. but other times they just lazy around; or 
go hawking-just hawking and sp-sh!-d' you hear a noise?" 
we skipped out and looked; but it warn't nothing but the flutter of a 
steamboat's wheel away down, coming around the point; so we come back. 
"yes," says i, "and other times, when things is dull, they fuss with the 
parlyment; and if everybody don't go just so he whacks their heads off. 
but mostly they hang round the harem." 
"roun' de which?" 
"harem." 
"what's de harem?" 
"the place where he keeps his wives. don't you know about the harem? 
solomon had one; he had about a million wives." 
"why, yes, dat's so; i-i'd done forgot it. a harem's a bo'd'n-house, i 
reck'n. mos' likely dey has rackety times in de nussery. en i reck'n de 
wives quarrels considable; en dat 'crease de racket. yit dey say 
sollermun de wises' man dat ever live'. i doan' take no stock in dat. 
bekase why: would a wise man want to live in de mids' er sich a 
blim-blammin' all de time? no-'deed he wouldn't. a wise man 'ud take 
en buil' a biler-factry; en den he could shet down de biler-factry when 
he want to res'." 
"well, but he was the wisest man, anyway; because the widow she told me 
so, her own self." 
"i doan k'yer what de widder say, he warn't no wise man nuther. he had 
some er de dad-fetchedes' ways i ever see. does you know 'bout dat chile 
dat he 'uz gwyne to chop in two?" 
"yes, the widow told me all about it." 
"well, den! warn' dat de beatenes' notion in de worl'? you jes' take en 
look at it a minute. dah's de stump, dah-dat's one er de women; heah's 
you-dat's de yuther one; i's sollermun; en dish yer dollar bill's de 
chile. bofe un you claims it. what does i do? does i shin aroun' 
mongs' de neighbors en fine out which un you de bill do b'long to, en 
han' it over to de right one, all safe en soun', de way dat anybody dat 
had any gumption would? no; i take en whack de bill in two, en give half 
un it to you, en de yuther half to de yuther woman. dat's de way 
sollermun was gwyne to do wid de chile. now i want to ast you: what's 
de use er dat half a bill?-can't buy noth'n wid it. en what use is a 
half a chile? i wouldn' give a dern for a million un um." 
"but hang it, jim, you've clean missed the point-blame it, you've missed 
it a thousand mile." 
"who? me? go 'long. doan' talk to me 'bout yo' pints. i reck'n i 
knows sense when i sees it; en dey ain' no sense in sich doin's as dat. 
de 'spute warn't 'bout a half a chile, de 'spute was 'bout a whole chile; 
en de man dat think he kin settle a 'spute 'bout a whole chile wid a half 
a chile doan' know enough to come in out'n de rain. doan' talk to me 
'bout sollermun, huck, i knows him by de back." 
"but i tell you you don't get the point." 
"blame de point! i reck'n i knows what i knows. en mine you, de real 
pint is down furder-it's down deeper. it lays in de way sollermun was 
raised. you take a man dat's got on'y one or two chillen; is dat man 
gwyne to be waseful o' chillen? no, he ain't; he can't 'ford it. he 
know how to value 'em. but you take a man dat's got 'bout five million 
chillen runnin' roun' de house, en it's diffunt. he as soon chop a chile 
in two as a cat. dey's plenty mo'. a chile er two, mo' er less, warn't 
no consekens to sollermun, dad fatch him!" 
i never see such a nigger. if he got a notion in his head once, there 
warn't no getting it out again. he was the most down on solomon of any 
nigger i ever see. so i went to talking about other kings, and let 
solomon slide. i told about louis sixteenth that got his head cut off in 
france long time ago; and about his little boy the dolphin, that would a 
been a king, but they took and shut him up in jail, and some say he died 
there. 
"po' little chap." 
"but some says he got out and got away, and come to america." 
"dat's good! but he'll be pooty lonesome-dey ain' no kings here, is 
dey, huck?" 
"no." 
"den he cain't git no situation. what he gwyne to do?" 
"well, i don't know. some of them gets on the police, and some of them 
learns people how to talk french." 
"why, huck, doan' de french people talk de same way we does?" 
"no, jim; you couldn't understand a word they said-not a single word." 
"well, now, i be ding-busted! how do dat come?" 
"i don't know; but it's so. i got some of their jabber out of a book. 
s'pose a man was to come to you and say polly-voo-franzy-what would you 
think?" 
"i wouldn' think nuff'n; i'd take en bust him over de head-dat is, if he 
warn't white. i wouldn't 'low no nigger to call me dat." 
"shucks, it ain't calling you anything. it's only saying, do you know 
how to talk french?" 
"well, den, why couldn't he say it?" 
"why, he is a-saying it. that's a frenchman's way of saying it." 
"well, it's a blame ridicklous way, en i doan' want to hear no mo' 'bout 
it. dey ain' no sense in it." 
"looky here, jim; does a cat talk like we do?" 
"no, a cat don't." 
"well, does a cow?" 
"no, a cow don't, nuther." 
"does a cat talk like a cow, or a cow talk like a cat?" 
"no, dey don't." 
"it's natural and right for 'em to talk different from each other, ain't 
it?" 
"course." 
"and ain't it natural and right for a cat and a cow to talk different 
from us?" 
"why, mos' sholy it is." 
"well, then, why ain't it natural and right for a frenchman to talk 
different from us? you answer me that." 
"is a cat a man, huck?" 
"no." 
"well, den, dey ain't no sense in a cat talkin' like a man. is a cow a 
man?-er is a cow a cat?" 
"no, she ain't either of them." 
"well, den, she ain't got no business to talk like either one er the 
yuther of 'em. is a frenchman a man?" 
"yes." 
"well, den! dad blame it, why doan' he talk like a man? you answer me 
dat!" 
i see it warn't no use wasting words-you can't learn a nigger to argue. 
so i quit. 
chapter xv. 
we judged that three nights more would fetch us to cairo, at the bottom 
of illinois, where the ohio river comes in, and that was what we was 
after. we would sell the raft and get on a steamboat and go way up the 
ohio amongst the free states, and then be out of trouble. 
well, the second night a fog begun to come on, and we made for a towhead 
to tie to, for it wouldn't do to try to run in a fog; but when i paddled 
ahead in the canoe, with the line to make fast, there warn't anything but 
little saplings to tie to. i passed the line around one of them right on 
the edge of the cut bank, but there was a stiff current, and the raft 
come booming down so lively she tore it out by the roots and away she 
went. i see the fog closing down, and it made me so sick and scared i 
couldn't budge for most a half a minute it seemed to me-and then there 
warn't no raft in sight; you couldn't see twenty yards. i jumped into 
the canoe and run back to the stern, and grabbed the paddle and set her 
back a stroke. but she didn't come. i was in such a hurry i hadn't 
untied her. i got up and tried to untie her, but i was so excited my 
hands shook so i couldn't hardly do anything with them. 
as soon as i got started i took out after the raft, hot and heavy, right 
down the towhead. that was all right as far as it went, but the towhead 
warn't sixty yards long, and the minute i flew by the foot of it i shot 
out into the solid white fog, and hadn't no more idea which way i was 
going than a dead man. 
thinks i, it won't do to paddle; first i know i'll run into the bank or a 
towhead or something; i got to set still and float, and yet it's mighty 
fidgety business to have to hold your hands still at such a time. i 
whooped and listened. away down there somewheres i hears a small whoop, 
and up comes my spirits. i went tearing after it, listening sharp to 
hear it again. the next time it come i see i warn't heading for it, but 
heading away to the right of it. and the next time i was heading away to 
the left of it-and not gaining on it much either, for i was flying 
around, this way and that and t'other, but it was going straight ahead 
all the time. 
i did wish the fool would think to beat a tin pan, and beat it all the 
time, but he never did, and it was the still places between the whoops 
that was making the trouble for me. well, i fought along, and directly i 
hears the whoop behind me. i was tangled good now. that was somebody 
else's whoop, or else i was turned around. 
i throwed the paddle down. i heard the whoop again; it was behind me 
yet, but in a different place; it kept coming, and kept changing its 
place, and i kept answering, till by and by it was in front of me again, 
and i knowed the current had swung the canoe's head down-stream, and i 
was all right if that was jim and not some other raftsman hollering. i 
couldn't tell nothing about voices in a fog, for nothing don't look 
natural nor sound natural in a fog. 
the whooping went on, and in about a minute i come a-booming down on a 
cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees on it, and the current throwed me 
off to the left and shot by, amongst a lot of snags that fairly roared, 
the currrent was tearing by them so swift. 
in another second or two it was solid white and still again. i set 
perfectly still then, listening to my heart thump, and i reckon i didn't 
draw a breath while it thumped a hundred. 
i just give up then. i knowed what the matter was. that cut bank was an 
island, and jim had gone down t'other side of it. it warn't no towhead 
that you could float by in ten minutes. it had the big timber of a 
regular island; it might be five or six miles long and more than half a 
mile wide. 
i kept quiet, with my ears cocked, about fifteen minutes, i reckon. i 
was floating along, of course, four or five miles an hour; but you don't 
ever think of that. no, you feel like you are laying dead still on the 
water; and if a little glimpse of a snag slips by you don't think to 
yourself how fast you're going, but you catch your breath and think, my! 
how that snag's tearing along. if you think it ain't dismal and lonesome 
out in a fog that way by yourself in the night, you try it once-you'll 
see. 
next, for about a half an hour, i whoops now and then; at last i hears 
the answer a long ways off, and tries to follow it, but i couldn't do it, 
and directly i judged i'd got into a nest of towheads, for i had little 
dim glimpses of them on both sides of me-sometimes just a narrow channel 
between, and some that i couldn't see i knowed was there because i'd hear 
the wash of the current against the old dead brush and trash that hung 
over the banks. well, i warn't long loosing the whoops down amongst the 
towheads; and i only tried to chase them a little while, anyway, because 
it was worse than chasing a jack-o'-lantern. you never knowed a sound 
dodge around so, and swap places so quick and so much. 
i had to claw away from the bank pretty lively four or five times, to 
keep from knocking the islands out of the river; and so i judged the raft 
must be butting into the bank every now and then, or else it would get 
further ahead and clear out of hearing-it was floating a little faster 
than what i was. 
well, i seemed to be in the open river again by and by, but i couldn't 
hear no sign of a whoop nowheres. i reckoned jim had fetched up on a 
snag, maybe, and it was all up with him. i was good and tired, so i laid 
down in the canoe and said i wouldn't bother no more. i didn't want to 
go to sleep, of course; but i was so sleepy i couldn't help it; so i 
thought i would take jest one little cat-nap. 
but i reckon it was more than a cat-nap, for when i waked up the stars 
was shining bright, the fog was all gone, and i was spinning down a big 
bend stern first. first i didn't know where i was; i thought i was 
dreaming; and when things began to come back to me they seemed to come up 
dim out of last week. 
it was a monstrous big river here, with the tallest and the thickest kind 
of timber on both banks; just a solid wall, as well as i could see by the 
stars. i looked away down-stream, and seen a black speck on the water. 
i took after it; but when i got to it it warn't nothing but a couple of 
sawlogs made fast together. then i see another speck, and chased that; 
then another, and this time i was right. it was the raft. 
when i got to it jim was setting there with his head down between his 
knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over the steering-oar. the 
other oar was smashed off, and the raft was littered up with leaves and 
branches and dirt. so she'd had a rough time. 
i made fast and laid down under jim's nose on the raft, and began to gap, 
and stretch my fists out against jim, and says: 
"hello, jim, have i been asleep? why didn't you stir me up?" 
"goodness gracious, is dat you, huck? en you ain' dead-you ain' 
drownded-you's back agin? it's too good for true, honey, it's too 
good for true. lemme look at you chile, lemme feel o' you. no, you ain' 
dead! you's back agin, 'live en soun', jis de same ole huck-de same ole 
huck, thanks to goodness!" 
"what's the matter with you, jim? you been a-drinking?" 
"drinkin'? has i ben a-drinkin'? has i had a chance to be a-drinkin'?" 
"well, then, what makes you talk so wild?" 
"how does i talk wild?" 
"how? why, hain't you been talking about my coming back, and all that 
stuff, as if i'd been gone away?" 
"huck-huck finn, you look me in de eye; look me in de eye. hain't you 
ben gone away?" 
"gone away? why, what in the nation do you mean? i hain't been gone 
anywheres. where would i go to?" 
"well, looky here, boss, dey's sumf'n wrong, dey is. is i me, or who is 
i? is i heah, or whah is i? now dat's what i wants to know." 
"well, i think you're here, plain enough, but i think you're a 
tangle-headed old fool, jim." 
"i is, is i? well, you answer me dis: didn't you tote out de line in de 
canoe fer to make fas' to de tow-head?" 
"no, i didn't. what tow-head? i hain't see no tow-head." 
"you hain't seen no towhead? looky here, didn't de line pull loose en de 
raf' go a-hummin' down de river, en leave you en de canoe behine in de 
fog?" 
"what fog?" 
"why, de fog!-de fog dat's been aroun' all night. en didn't you whoop, 
en didn't i whoop, tell we got mix' up in de islands en one un us got 
los' en t'other one was jis' as good as los', 'kase he didn' know whah he 
wuz? en didn't i bust up agin a lot er dem islands en have a turrible 
time en mos' git drownded? now ain' dat so, boss-ain't it so? you 
answer me dat." 
"well, this is too many for me, jim. i hain't seen no fog, nor no 
islands, nor no troubles, nor nothing. i been setting here talking with 
you all night till you went to sleep about ten minutes ago, and i reckon 
i done the same. you couldn't a got drunk in that time, so of course 
you've been dreaming." 
"dad fetch it, how is i gwyne to dream all dat in ten minutes?" 
"well, hang it all, you did dream it, because there didn't any of it 
happen." 
"but, huck, it's all jis' as plain to me as-" 
"it don't make no difference how plain it is; there ain't nothing in it. 
i know, because i've been here all the time." 
jim didn't say nothing for about five minutes, but set there studying 
over it. then he says: 
"well, den, i reck'n i did dream it, huck; but dog my cats ef it ain't de 
powerfullest dream i ever see. en i hain't ever had no dream b'fo' dat's 
tired me like dis one." 
"oh, well, that's all right, because a dream does tire a body like 
everything sometimes. but this one was a staving dream; tell me all 
about it, jim." 
so jim went to work and told me the whole thing right through, just as it 
happened, only he painted it up considerable. then he said he must start 
in and "'terpret" it, because it was sent for a warning. he said the 
first towhead stood for a man that would try to do us some good, but the 
current was another man that would get us away from him. the whoops was 
warnings that would come to us every now and then, and if we didn't try 
hard to make out to understand them they'd just take us into bad luck, 
'stead of keeping us out of it. the lot of towheads was troubles we was 
going to get into with quarrelsome people and all kinds of mean folks, 
but if we minded our business and didn't talk back and aggravate them, we 
would pull through and get out of the fog and into the big clear river, 
which was the free states, and wouldn't have no more trouble. 
it had clouded up pretty dark just after i got on to the raft, but it was 
clearing up again now. 
"oh, well, that's all interpreted well enough as far as it goes, jim," i 
says; "but what does these things stand for?" 
it was the leaves and rubbish on the raft and the smashed oar. you could 
see them first-rate now. 
jim looked at the trash, and then looked at me, and back at the trash 
again. he had got the dream fixed so strong in his head that he couldn't 
seem to shake it loose and get the facts back into its place again right 
away. but when he did get the thing straightened around he looked at me 
steady without ever smiling, and says: 
"what do dey stan' for? i'se gwyne to tell you. when i got all wore out 
wid work, en wid de callin' for you, en went to sleep, my heart wuz mos' 
broke bekase you wuz los', en i didn' k'yer no' mo' what become er me en 
de raf'. en when i wake up en fine you back agin, all safe en soun', de 
tears come, en i could a got down on my knees en kiss yo' foot, i's so 
thankful. en all you wuz thinkin' 'bout wuz how you could make a fool uv 
ole jim wid a lie. dat truck dah is trash; en trash is what people is 
dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren's en makes 'em ashamed." 
then he got up slow and walked to the wigwam, and went in there without 
saying anything but that. but that was enough. it made me feel so mean 
i could almost kissed his foot to get him to take it back. 
it was fifteen minutes before i could work myself up to go and humble 
myself to a nigger; but i done it, and i warn't ever sorry for it 
afterwards, neither. i didn't do him no more mean tricks, and i wouldn't 
done that one if i'd a knowed it would make him feel that way. 
chapter xvi. 
we slept most all day, and started out at night, a little ways behind a 
monstrous long raft that was as long going by as a procession. she had 
four long sweeps at each end, so we judged she carried as many as thirty 
men, likely. she had five big wigwams aboard, wide apart, and an open 
camp fire in the middle, and a tall flag-pole at each end. there was a 
power of style about her. it amounted to something being a raftsman on 
such a craft as that. 
we went drifting down into a big bend, and the night clouded up and got 
hot. the river was very wide, and was walled with solid timber on both 
sides; you couldn't see a break in it hardly ever, or a light. we talked 
about cairo, and wondered whether we would know it when we got to it. i 
said likely we wouldn't, because i had heard say there warn't but about a 
dozen houses there, and if they didn't happen to have them lit up, how 
was we going to know we was passing a town? jim said if the two big 
rivers joined together there, that would show. but i said maybe we might 
think we was passing the foot of an island and coming into the same old 
river again. that disturbed jim-and me too. so the question was, what 
to do? i said, paddle ashore the first time a light showed, and tell 
them pap was behind, coming along with a trading-scow, and was a green 
hand at the business, and wanted to know how far it was to cairo. jim 
thought it was a good idea, so we took a smoke on it and waited. 
there warn't nothing to do now but to look out sharp for the town, and 
not pass it without seeing it. he said he'd be mighty sure to see it, 
because he'd be a free man the minute he seen it, but if he missed it 
he'd be in a slave country again and no more show for freedom. every 
little while he jumps up and says: 
"dah she is?" 
but it warn't. it was jack-o'-lanterns, or lightning bugs; so he set 
down again, and went to watching, same as before. jim said it made him 
all over trembly and feverish to be so close to freedom. well, i can 
tell you it made me all over trembly and feverish, too, to hear him, 
because i begun to get it through my head that he was most free-and who 
was to blame for it? why, me. i couldn't get that out of my conscience, 
no how nor no way. it got to troubling me so i couldn't rest; i couldn't 
stay still in one place. it hadn't ever come home to me before, what 
this thing was that i was doing. but now it did; and it stayed with me, 
and scorched me more and more. i tried to make out to myself that i 
warn't to blame, because i didn't run jim off from his rightful owner; 
but it warn't no use, conscience up and says, every time, "but you knowed 
he was running for his freedom, and you could a paddled ashore and told 
somebody." that was so-i couldn't get around that noway. that was 
where it pinched. conscience says to me, "what had poor miss watson done 
to you that you could see her nigger go off right under your eyes and 
never say one single word? what did that poor old woman do to you that 
you could treat her so mean? why, she tried to learn you your book, she 
tried to learn you your manners, she tried to be good to you every way 
she knowed how. that's what she done." 
i got to feeling so mean and so miserable i most wished i was dead. i 
fidgeted up and down the raft, abusing myself to myself, and jim was 
fidgeting up and down past me. we neither of us could keep still. every 
time he danced around and says, "dah's cairo!" it went through me like a 
shot, and i thought if it was cairo i reckoned i would die of 
miserableness. 
jim talked out loud all the time while i was talking to myself. he was 
saying how the first thing he would do when he got to a free state he 
would go to saving up money and never spend a single cent, and when he 
got enough he would buy his wife, which was owned on a farm close to 
where miss watson lived; and then they would both work to buy the two 
children, and if their master wouldn't sell them, they'd get an 
ab'litionist to go and steal them. 
it most froze me to hear such talk. he wouldn't ever dared to talk such 
talk in his life before. just see what a difference it made in him the 
minute he judged he was about free. it was according to the old saying, 
"give a nigger an inch and he'll take an ell." thinks i, this is what 
comes of my not thinking. here was this nigger, which i had as good as 
helped to run away, coming right out flat-footed and saying he would 
steal his children-children that belonged to a man i didn't even know; a 
man that hadn't ever done me no harm. 
i was sorry to hear jim say that, it was such a lowering of him. my 
conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever, until at last i says 
to it, "let up on me-it ain't too late yet-i'll paddle ashore at the 
first light and tell." i felt easy and happy and light as a feather 
right off. all my troubles was gone. i went to looking out sharp for a 
light, and sort of singing to myself. by and by one showed. jim sings 
out: 
"we's safe, huck, we's safe! jump up and crack yo' heels! dat's de good 
ole cairo at las', i jis knows it!" 
i says: 
"i'll take the canoe and go and see, jim. it mightn't be, you know." 
he jumped and got the canoe ready, and put his old coat in the bottom for 
me to set on, and give me the paddle; and as i shoved off, he says: 
"pooty soon i'll be a-shout'n' for joy, en i'll say, it's all on accounts 
o' huck; i's a free man, en i couldn't ever ben free ef it hadn' ben for 
huck; huck done it. jim won't ever forgit you, huck; you's de bes' fren' 
jim's ever had; en you's de only fren' ole jim's got now." 
i was paddling off, all in a sweat to tell on him; but when he says this, 
it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me. i went along slow 
then, and i warn't right down certain whether i was glad i started or 
whether i warn't. when i was fifty yards off, jim says: 
"dah you goes, de ole true huck; de on'y white genlman dat ever kep' his 
promise to ole jim." 
well, i just felt sick. but i says, i got to do it-i can't get out of 
it. right then along comes a skiff with two men in it with guns, and 
they stopped and i stopped. one of them says: 
"what's that yonder?" 
"a piece of a raft," i says. 
"do you belong on it?" 
"yes, sir." 
"any men on it?" 
"only one, sir." 
"well, there's five niggers run off to-night up yonder, above the head of 
the bend. is your man white or black?" 
i didn't answer up prompt. i tried to, but the words wouldn't come. i 
tried for a second or two to brace up and out with it, but i warn't man 
enough-hadn't the spunk of a rabbit. i see i was weakening; so i just 
give up trying, and up and says: 
"he's white." 
"i reckon we'll go and see for ourselves." 
"i wish you would," says i, "because it's pap that's there, and maybe 
you'd help me tow the raft ashore where the light is. he's sick-and so 
is mam and mary ann." 
"oh, the devil! we're in a hurry, boy. but i s'pose we've got to. come, 
buckle to your paddle, and let's get along." 
i buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oars. when we had made a 
stroke or two, i says: 
"pap'll be mighty much obleeged to you, i can tell you. everybody goes 
away when i want them to help me tow the raft ashore, and i can't do it 
by myself." 
"well, that's infernal mean. odd, too. say, boy, what's the matter with 
your father?" 
"it's the-a-the-well, it ain't anything much." 
they stopped pulling. it warn't but a mighty little ways to the raft 
now. one says: 
"boy, that's a lie. what is the matter with your pap? answer up square 
now, and it'll be the better for you." 
"i will, sir, i will, honest-but don't leave us, please. it's the-the 
gentlemen, if you'll only pull ahead, and let me heave you the 
headline, you won't have to come a-near the raft-please do." 
"set her back, john, set her back!" says one. they backed water. "keep 
away, boy-keep to looard. confound it, i just expect the wind has 
blowed it to us. your pap's got the small-pox, and you know it precious 
well. why didn't you come out and say so? do you want to spread it all 
over?" 
"well," says i, a-blubbering, "i've told everybody before, and they just 
went away and left us." 
"poor devil, there's something in that. we are right down sorry for you, 
but we-well, hang it, we don't want the small-pox, you see. look here, 
i'll tell you what to do. don't you try to land by yourself, or you'll 
smash everything to pieces. you float along down about twenty miles, and 
you'll come to a town on the left-hand side of the river. it will be 
long after sun-up then, and when you ask for help you tell them your 
folks are all down with chills and fever. don't be a fool again, and let 
people guess what is the matter. now we're trying to do you a kindness; 
so you just put twenty miles between us, that's a good boy. it wouldn't 
do any good to land yonder where the light is-it's only a wood-yard. 
say, i reckon your father's poor, and i'm bound to say he's in pretty 
hard luck. here, i'll put a twenty-dollar gold piece on this board, and 
you get it when it floats by. i feel mighty mean to leave you; but my 
kingdom! it won't do to fool with small-pox, don't you see?" 
"hold on, parker," says the other man, "here's a twenty to put on the 
board for me. good-bye, boy; you do as mr. parker told you, and you'll 
be all right." 
"that's so, my boy-good-bye, good-bye. if you see any runaway niggers 
you get help and nab them, and you can make some money by it." 
"good-bye, sir," says i; "i won't let no runaway niggers get by me if i 
can help it." 
they went off and i got aboard the raft, feeling bad and low, because i 
knowed very well i had done wrong, and i see it warn't no use for me to 
try to learn to do right; a body that don't get started right when he's 
little ain't got no show-when the pinch comes there ain't nothing to 
back him up and keep him to his work, and so he gets beat. then i 
thought a minute, and says to myself, hold on; s'pose you'd a done right 
and give jim up, would you felt better than what you do now? no, says i, 
i'd feel bad-i'd feel just the same way i do now. well, then, says i, 
what's the use you learning to do right when it's troublesome to do right 
and ain't no trouble to do wrong, and the wages is just the same? i was 
stuck. i couldn't answer that. so i reckoned i wouldn't bother no more 
about it, but after this always do whichever come handiest at the time. 
i went into the wigwam; jim warn't there. i looked all around; he warn't 
anywhere. i says: 
"jim!" 
"here i is, huck. is dey out o' sight yit? don't talk loud." 
he was in the river under the stern oar, with just his nose out. i told 
him they were out of sight, so he come aboard. he says: 
"i was a-listenin' to all de talk, en i slips into de river en was gwyne 
to shove for sho' if dey come aboard. den i was gwyne to swim to de raf' 
agin when dey was gone. but lawsy, how you did fool 'em, huck! dat wuz 
de smartes' dodge! i tell you, chile, i'spec it save' ole jim-ole jim 
ain't going to forgit you for dat, honey." 
then we talked about the money. it was a pretty good raise-twenty 
dollars apiece. jim said we could take deck passage on a steamboat now, 
and the money would last us as far as we wanted to go in the free states. 
he said twenty mile more warn't far for the raft to go, but he wished we 
was already there. 
towards daybreak we tied up, and jim was mighty particular about hiding 
the raft good. then he worked all day fixing things in bundles, and 
getting all ready to quit rafting. 
that night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a town away down 
in a left-hand bend. 
i went off in the canoe to ask about it. pretty soon i found a man out 
in the river with a skiff, setting a trot-line. i ranged up and says: 
"mister, is that town cairo?" 
"cairo? no. you must be a blame' fool." 
"what town is it, mister?" 
"if you want to know, go and find out. if you stay here botherin' around 
me for about a half a minute longer you'll get something you won't want." 
i paddled to the raft. jim was awful disappointed, but i said never 
mind, cairo would be the next place, i reckoned. 
we passed another town before daylight, and i was going out again; but it 
was high ground, so i didn't go. no high ground about cairo, jim said. 
i had forgot it. we laid up for the day on a towhead tolerable close to 
the left-hand bank. i begun to suspicion something. so did jim. i 
says: 
"maybe we went by cairo in the fog that night." 
he says: 
"doan' le's talk about it, huck. po' niggers can't have no luck. i 
awluz 'spected dat rattlesnake-skin warn't done wid its work." 
"i wish i'd never seen that snake-skin, jim-i do wish i'd never laid 
eyes on it." 
"it ain't yo' fault, huck; you didn' know. don't you blame yo'self 'bout 
it." 
when it was daylight, here was the clear ohio water inshore, sure enough, 
and outside was the old regular muddy! so it was all up with cairo. 
we talked it all over. it wouldn't do to take to the shore; we couldn't 
take the raft up the stream, of course. there warn't no way but to wait 
for dark, and start back in the canoe and take the chances. so we slept 
all day amongst the cottonwood thicket, so as to be fresh for the work, 
and when we went back to the raft about dark the canoe was gone! 
we didn't say a word for a good while. there warn't anything to say. we 
both knowed well enough it was some more work of the rattlesnake-skin; so 
what was the use to talk about it? it would only look like we was 
finding fault, and that would be bound to fetch more bad luck-and keep 
on fetching it, too, till we knowed enough to keep still. 
by and by we talked about what we better do, and found there warn't no 
way but just to go along down with the raft till we got a chance to buy a 
canoe to go back in. we warn't going to borrow it when there warn't 
anybody around, the way pap would do, for that might set people after us. 
so we shoved out after dark on the raft. 
anybody that don't believe yet that it's foolishness to handle a 
snake-skin, after all that that snake-skin done for us, will believe 
it now if they read on and see what more it done for us. 
the place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying up at shore. but we 
didn't see no rafts laying up; so we went along during three hours and 
more. well, the night got gray and ruther thick, which is the next 
meanest thing to fog. you can't tell the shape of the river, and you 
can't see no distance. it got to be very late and still, and then along 
comes a steamboat up the river. we lit the lantern, and judged she would 
see it. up-stream boats didn't generly come close to us; they go out and 
follow the bars and hunt for easy water under the reefs; but nights like 
this they bull right up the channel against the whole river. 
we could hear her pounding along, but we didn't see her good till she was 
close. she aimed right for us. often they do that and try to see how 
close they can come without touching; sometimes the wheel bites off a 
sweep, and then the pilot sticks his head out and laughs, and thinks he's 
mighty smart. well, here she comes, and we said she was going to try and 
shave us; but she didn't seem to be sheering off a bit. she was a big 
one, and she was coming in a hurry, too, looking like a black cloud with 
rows of glow-worms around it; but all of a sudden she bulged out, big and 
scary, with a long row of wide-open furnace doors shining like red-hot 
teeth, and her monstrous bows and guards hanging right over us. there 
was a yell at us, and a jingling of bells to stop the engines, a powwow 
of cussing, and whistling of steam-and as jim went overboard on one side 
and i on the other, she come smashing straight through the raft. 
i dived-and i aimed to find the bottom, too, for a thirty-foot wheel had 
got to go over me, and i wanted it to have plenty of room. i could 
always stay under water a minute; this time i reckon i stayed under a 
minute and a half. then i bounced for the top in a hurry, for i was 
nearly busting. i popped out to my armpits and blowed the water out of 
my nose, and puffed a bit. of course there was a booming current; and of 
course that boat started her engines again ten seconds after she stopped 
them, for they never cared much for raftsmen; so now she was churning 
along up the river, out of sight in the thick weather, though i could 
hear her. 
i sung out for jim about a dozen times, but i didn't get any answer; so i 
grabbed a plank that touched me while i was "treading water," and struck 
out for shore, shoving it ahead of me. but i made out to see that the 
drift of the current was towards the left-hand shore, which meant that i 
was in a crossing; so i changed off and went that way. 
it was one of these long, slanting, two-mile crossings; so i was a good 
long time in getting over. i made a safe landing, and clumb up the bank. 
i couldn't see but a little ways, but i went poking along over rough 
ground for a quarter of a mile or more, and then i run across a big 
old-fashioned double log-house before i noticed it. i was going to rush 
by and get away, but a lot of dogs jumped out and went to howling and 
barking at me, and i knowed better than to move another peg. 
chapter xvii. 
in about a minute somebody spoke out of a window without putting his head 
out, and says: 
"be done, boys! who's there?" 
i says: 
"it's me." 
"who's me?" 
"george jackson, sir." 
"what do you want?" 
"i don't want nothing, sir. i only want to go along by, but the dogs 
won't let me." 
"what are you prowling around here this time of night for-hey?" 
"i warn't prowling around, sir, i fell overboard off of the steamboat." 
"oh, you did, did you? strike a light there, somebody. what did you say 
your name was?" 
"george jackson, sir. i'm only a boy." 
"look here, if you're telling the truth you needn't be afraid-nobody'll 
hurt you. but don't try to budge; stand right where you are. rouse out 
bob and tom, some of you, and fetch the guns. george jackson, is there 
anybody with you?" 
"no, sir, nobody." 
i heard the people stirring around in the house now, and see a light. 
the man sung out: 
"snatch that light away, betsy, you old fool-ain't you got any sense? 
put it on the floor behind the front door. bob, if you and tom are 
ready, take your places." 
"all ready." 
"now, george jackson, do you know the shepherdsons?" 
"no, sir; i never heard of them." 
"well, that may be so, and it mayn't. now, all ready. step forward, 
george jackson. and mind, don't you hurry-come mighty slow. if there's 
anybody with you, let him keep back-if he shows himself he'll be shot. 
come along now. come slow; push the door open yourself-just enough to 
squeeze in, d' you hear?" 
i didn't hurry; i couldn't if i'd a wanted to. i took one slow step at a 
time and there warn't a sound, only i thought i could hear my heart. the 
dogs were as still as the humans, but they followed a little behind me. 
when i got to the three log doorsteps i heard them unlocking and 
unbarring and unbolting. i put my hand on the door and pushed it a 
little and a little more till somebody said, "there, that's enough-put 
your head in." i done it, but i judged they would take it off. 
the candle was on the floor, and there they all was, looking at me, and 
me at them, for about a quarter of a minute: three big men with guns 
pointed at me, which made me wince, i tell you; the oldest, gray and 
about sixty, the other two thirty or more-all of them fine and handsome 
and the sweetest old gray-headed lady, and back of her two young women 
which i couldn't see right well. the old gentleman says: 
"there; i reckon it's all right. come in." 
as soon as i was in the old gentleman he locked the door and barred it 
and bolted it, and told the young men to come in with their guns, and 
they all went in a big parlor that had a new rag carpet on the floor, and 
got together in a corner that was out of the range of the front windows 
there warn't none on the side. they held the candle, and took a good 
look at me, and all said, "why, he ain't a shepherdson-no, there ain't 
any shepherdson about him." then the old man said he hoped i wouldn't 
mind being searched for arms, because he didn't mean no harm by it-it 
was only to make sure. so he didn't pry into my pockets, but only felt 
outside with his hands, and said it was all right. he told me to make 
myself easy and at home, and tell all about myself; but the old lady 
says: 
"why, bless you, saul, the poor thing's as wet as he can be; and don't 
you reckon it may be he's hungry?" 
"true for you, rachel-i forgot." 
so the old lady says: 
"betsy" (this was a nigger woman), "you fly around and get him something 
to eat as quick as you can, poor thing; and one of you girls go and wake 
up buck and tell him-oh, here he is himself. buck, take this little 
stranger and get the wet clothes off from him and dress him up in some of 
yours that's dry." 
buck looked about as old as me-thirteen or fourteen or along there, 
though he was a little bigger than me. he hadn't on anything but a 
shirt, and he was very frowzy-headed. he came in gaping and digging one 
fist into his eyes, and he was dragging a gun along with the other one. 
he says: 
"ain't they no shepherdsons around?" 
they said, no, 'twas a false alarm. 
"well," he says, "if they'd a ben some, i reckon i'd a got one." 
they all laughed, and bob says: 
"why, buck, they might have scalped us all, you've been so slow in 
coming." 
"well, nobody come after me, and it ain't right i'm always kept down; i 
don't get no show." 
"never mind, buck, my boy," says the old man, "you'll have show enough, 
all in good time, don't you fret about that. go 'long with you now, and 
do as your mother told you." 
when we got up-stairs to his room he got me a coarse shirt and a 
roundabout and pants of his, and i put them on. while i was at it he 
asked me what my name was, but before i could tell him he started to tell 
me about a bluejay and a young rabbit he had catched in the woods day 
before yesterday, and he asked me where moses was when the candle went 
out. i said i didn't know; i hadn't heard about it before, no way. 
"well, guess," he says. 
"how'm i going to guess," says i, "when i never heard tell of it before?" 
"but you can guess, can't you? it's just as easy." 
"which candle?" i says. 
"why, any candle," he says. 
"i don't know where he was," says i; "where was he?" 
"why, he was in the dark! that's where he was!" 
"well, if you knowed where he was, what did you ask me for?" 
"why, blame it, it's a riddle, don't you see? say, how long are you 
going to stay here? you got to stay always. we can just have booming 
times-they don't have no school now. do you own a dog? i've got a 
dog-and he'll go in the river and bring out chips that you throw in. do 
you like to comb up sundays, and all that kind of foolishness? you bet i 
don't, but ma she makes me. confound these ole britches! i reckon i'd 
better put 'em on, but i'd ruther not, it's so warm. are you all ready? 
all right. come along, old hoss." 
cold corn-pone, cold corn-beef, butter and buttermilk-that is what they 
had for me down there, and there ain't nothing better that ever i've come 
across yet. buck and his ma and all of them smoked cob pipes, except the 
nigger woman, which was gone, and the two young women. they all smoked 
and talked, and i eat and talked. the young women had quilts around 
them, and their hair down their backs. they all asked me questions, and 
i told them how pap and me and all the family was living on a little farm 
down at the bottom of arkansaw, and my sister mary ann run off and got 
married and never was heard of no more, and bill went to hunt them and he 
warn't heard of no more, and tom and mort died, and then there warn't 
nobody but just me and pap left, and he was just trimmed down to nothing, 
on account of his troubles; so when he died i took what there was left, 
because the farm didn't belong to us, and started up the river, deck 
passage, and fell overboard; and that was how i come to be here. so they 
said i could have a home there as long as i wanted it. then it was most 
daylight and everybody went to bed, and i went to bed with buck, and when 
i waked up in the morning, drat it all, i had forgot what my name was. 
so i laid there about an hour trying to think, and when buck waked up i 
says: 
"can you spell, buck?" 
"yes," he says. 
"i bet you can't spell my name," says i. 
"i bet you what you dare i can," says he. 
"all right," says i, "go ahead." 
"g-e-o-r-g-e j-a-x-o-n-there now," he says. 
"well," says i, "you done it, but i didn't think you could. it ain't no 
slouch of a name to spell-right off without studying." 
i set it down, private, because somebody might want me to spell it next, 
and so i wanted to be handy with it and rattle it off like i was used to 
it. 
it was a mighty nice family, and a mighty nice house, too. i hadn't seen 
no house out in the country before that was so nice and had so much 
style. it didn't have an iron latch on the front door, nor a wooden one 
with a buckskin string, but a brass knob to turn, the same as houses in 
town. there warn't no bed in the parlor, nor a sign of a bed; but heaps 
of parlors in towns has beds in them. there was a big fireplace that was 
bricked on the bottom, and the bricks was kept clean and red by pouring 
water on them and scrubbing them with another brick; sometimes they wash 
them over with red water-paint that they call spanish-brown, same as they 
do in town. they had big brass dog-irons that could hold up a saw-log. 
there was a clock on the middle of the mantelpiece, with a picture of a 
town painted on the bottom half of the glass front, and a round place in 
the middle of it for the sun, and you could see the pendulum swinging 
behind it. it was beautiful to hear that clock tick; and sometimes when 
one of these peddlers had been along and scoured her up and got her in 
good shape, she would start in and strike a hundred and fifty before she 
got tuckered out. they wouldn't took any money for her. 
well, there was a big outlandish parrot on each side of the clock, made 
out of something like chalk, and painted up gaudy. by one of the parrots 
was a cat made of crockery, and a crockery dog by the other; and when you 
pressed down on them they squeaked, but didn't open their mouths nor look 
different nor interested. they squeaked through underneath. there was a 
couple of big wild-turkey-wing fans spread out behind those things. on 
the table in the middle of the room was a kind of a lovely crockery 
basket that had apples and oranges and peaches and grapes piled up in it, 
which was much redder and yellower and prettier than real ones is, but 
they warn't real because you could see where pieces had got chipped off 
and showed the white chalk, or whatever it was, underneath. 
this table had a cover made out of beautiful oilcloth, with a red and 
blue spread-eagle painted on it, and a painted border all around. it 
come all the way from philadelphia, they said. there was some books, 
too, piled up perfectly exact, on each corner of the table. one was a 
big family bible full of pictures. one was pilgrim's progress, about a 
man that left his family, it didn't say why. i read considerable in it 
now and then. the statements was interesting, but tough. another was 
friendship's offering, full of beautiful stuff and poetry; but i didn't 
read the poetry. another was henry clay's speeches, and another was dr. 
gunn's family medicine, which told you all about what to do if a body was 
sick or dead. there was a hymn book, and a lot of other books. and 
there was nice split-bottom chairs, and perfectly sound, too-not bagged 
down in the middle and busted, like an old basket. 
they had pictures hung on the walls-mainly washingtons and lafayettes, 
and battles, and highland marys, and one called "signing the 
declaration." there was some that they called crayons, which one of the 
daughters which was dead made her own self when she was only fifteen 
years old. they was different from any pictures i ever see before 
blacker, mostly, than is common. one was a woman in a slim black dress, 
belted small under the armpits, with bulges like a cabbage in the middle 
of the sleeves, and a large black scoop-shovel bonnet with a black veil, 
and white slim ankles crossed about with black tape, and very wee black 
slippers, like a chisel, and she was leaning pensive on a tombstone on 
her right elbow, under a weeping willow, and her other hand hanging down 
her side holding a white handkerchief and a reticule, and underneath the 
picture it said "shall i never see thee more alas." another one was a 
young lady with her hair all combed up straight to the top of her head, 
and knotted there in front of a comb like a chair-back, and she was 
crying into a handkerchief and had a dead bird laying on its back in her 
other hand with its heels up, and underneath the picture it said "i shall 
never hear thy sweet chirrup more alas." there was one where a young 
lady was at a window looking up at the moon, and tears running down her 
cheeks; and she had an open letter in one hand with black sealing wax 
showing on one edge of it, and she was mashing a locket with a chain to 
it against her mouth, and underneath the picture it said "and art thou 
gone yes thou art gone alas." these was all nice pictures, i reckon, but 
i didn't somehow seem to take to them, because if ever i was down a 
little they always give me the fan-tods. everybody was sorry she died, 
because she had laid out a lot more of these pictures to do, and a body 
could see by what she had done what they had lost. but i reckoned that 
with her disposition she was having a better time in the graveyard. she 
was at work on what they said was her greatest picture when she took 
sick, and every day and every night it was her prayer to be allowed to 
live till she got it done, but she never got the chance. it was a 
picture of a young woman in a long white gown, standing on the rail of a 
bridge all ready to jump off, with her hair all down her back, and 
looking up to the moon, with the tears running down her face, and she had 
two arms folded across her breast, and two arms stretched out in front, 
and two more reaching up towards the moon-and the idea was to see which 
pair would look best, and then scratch out all the other arms; but, as i 
was saying, she died before she got her mind made up, and now they kept 
this picture over the head of the bed in her room, and every time her 
birthday come they hung flowers on it. other times it was hid with a 
little curtain. the young woman in the picture had a kind of a nice 
sweet face, but there was so many arms it made her look too spidery, 
seemed to me. 
this young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive, and used to paste 
obituaries and accidents and cases of patient suffering in it out of the 
presbyterian observer, and write poetry after them out of her own head. 
it was very good poetry. this is what she wrote about a boy by the name 
of stephen dowling bots that fell down a well and was drownded: 
ode to stephen dowling bots, dec'd 
and did young stephen sicken, and did young stephen die? and did the sad 
hearts thicken, and did the mourners cry? 
no; such was not the fate of young stephen dowling bots; though sad 
hearts round him thickened, 'twas not from sickness' shots. 
no whooping-cough did rack his frame, nor measles drear with spots; not 
these impaired the sacred name of stephen dowling bots. 
despised love struck not with woe that head of curly knots, nor stomach 
troubles laid him low, young stephen dowling bots. 
o no. then list with tearful eye, whilst i his fate do tell. his soul 
did from this cold world fly by falling down a well. 
they got him out and emptied him; alas it was too late; his spirit was 
gone for to sport aloft in the realms of the good and great. 
if emmeline grangerford could make poetry like that before she was 
fourteen, there ain't no telling what she could a done by and by. buck 
said she could rattle off poetry like nothing. she didn't ever have to 
stop to think. he said she would slap down a line, and if she couldn't 
find anything to rhyme with it would just scratch it out and slap down 
another one, and go ahead. she warn't particular; she could write about 
anything you choose to give her to write about just so it was sadful. 
every time a man died, or a woman died, or a child died, she would be on 
hand with her "tribute" before he was cold. she called them tributes. 
the neighbors said it was the doctor first, then emmeline, then the 
undertaker-the undertaker never got in ahead of emmeline but once, and 
then she hung fire on a rhyme for the dead person's name, which was 
whistler. she warn't ever the same after that; she never complained, but 
she kinder pined away and did not live long. poor thing, many's the time 
i made myself go up to the little room that used to be hers and get out 
her poor old scrap-book and read in it when her pictures had been 
aggravating me and i had soured on her a little. i liked all that 
family, dead ones and all, and warn't going to let anything come between 
us. poor emmeline made poetry about all the dead people when she was 
alive, and it didn't seem right that there warn't nobody to make some 
about her now she was gone; so i tried to sweat out a verse or two 
myself, but i couldn't seem to make it go somehow. they kept emmeline's 
room trim and nice, and all the things fixed in it just the way she liked 
to have them when she was alive, and nobody ever slept there. the old 
lady took care of the room herself, though there was plenty of niggers, 
and she sewed there a good deal and read her bible there mostly. 
well, as i was saying about the parlor, there was beautiful curtains on 
the windows: white, with pictures painted on them of castles with vines 
all down the walls, and cattle coming down to drink. there was a little 
old piano, too, that had tin pans in it, i reckon, and nothing was ever 
so lovely as to hear the young ladies sing "the last link is broken" and 
play "the battle of prague" on it. the walls of all the rooms was 
plastered, and most had carpets on the floors, and the whole house was 
whitewashed on the outside. 
it was a double house, and the big open place betwixt them was roofed and 
floored, and sometimes the table was set there in the middle of the day, 
and it was a cool, comfortable place. nothing couldn't be better. and 
warn't the cooking good, and just bushels of it too! 
chapter xviii. 
col. grangerford was a gentleman, you see. he was a gentleman all over; 
and so was his family. he was well born, as the saying is, and that's 
worth as much in a man as it is in a horse, so the widow douglas said, 
and nobody ever denied that she was of the first aristocracy in our town; 
and pap he always said it, too, though he warn't no more quality than a 
mudcat himself. col. grangerford was very tall and very slim, and had a 
darkish-paly complexion, not a sign of red in it anywheres; he was clean 
shaved every morning all over his thin face, and he had the thinnest kind 
of lips, and the thinnest kind of nostrils, and a high nose, and heavy 
eyebrows, and the blackest kind of eyes, sunk so deep back that they 
seemed like they was looking out of caverns at you, as you may say. his 
forehead was high, and his hair was black and straight and hung to his 
shoulders. his hands was long and thin, and every day of his life he put 
on a clean shirt and a full suit from head to foot made out of linen so 
white it hurt your eyes to look at it; and on sundays he wore a blue 
tail-coat with brass buttons on it. he carried a mahogany cane with a 
silver head to it. there warn't no frivolishness about him, not a bit, 
and he warn't ever loud. he was as kind as he could be-you could feel 
that, you know, and so you had confidence. sometimes he smiled, and it 
was good to see; but when he straightened himself up like a liberty-pole, 
and the lightning begun to flicker out from under his eyebrows, you 
wanted to climb a tree first, and find out what the matter was 
afterwards. he didn't ever have to tell anybody to mind their manners 
everybody was always good-mannered where he was. everybody loved to have 
him around, too; he was sunshine most always-i mean he made it seem 
like good weather. when he turned into a cloudbank it was awful dark for 
half a minute, and that was enough; there wouldn't nothing go wrong again 
for a week. 
when him and the old lady come down in the morning all the family got up 
out of their chairs and give them good-day, and didn't set down again 
till they had set down. then tom and bob went to the sideboard where the 
decanter was, and mixed a glass of bitters and handed it to him, and he 
held it in his hand and waited till tom's and bob's was mixed, and then 
they bowed and said, "our duty to you, sir, and madam;" and they bowed 
the least bit in the world and said thank you, and so they drank, all 
three, and bob and tom poured a spoonful of water on the sugar and the 
mite of whisky or apple brandy in the bottom of their tumblers, and give 
it to me and buck, and we drank to the old people too. 
bob was the oldest and tom next-tall, beautiful men with very broad 
shoulders and brown faces, and long black hair and black eyes. they 
dressed in white linen from head to foot, like the old gentleman, and 
wore broad panama hats. 
then there was miss charlotte; she was twenty-five, and tall and proud 
and grand, but as good as she could be when she warn't stirred up; but 
when she was she had a look that would make you wilt in your tracks, like 
her father. she was beautiful. 
so was her sister, miss sophia, but it was a different kind. she was 
gentle and sweet like a dove, and she was only twenty. 
each person had their own nigger to wait on them-buck too. my nigger 
had a monstrous easy time, because i warn't used to having anybody do 
anything for me, but buck's was on the jump most of the time. 
this was all there was of the family now, but there used to be more 
three sons; they got killed; and emmeline that died. 
the old gentleman owned a lot of farms and over a hundred niggers. 
sometimes a stack of people would come there, horseback, from ten or 
fifteen mile around, and stay five or six days, and have such junketings 
round about and on the river, and dances and picnics in the woods 
daytimes, and balls at the house nights. these people was mostly 
kinfolks of the family. the men brought their guns with them. it was a 
handsome lot of quality, i tell you. 
there was another clan of aristocracy around there-five or six families 
mostly of the name of shepherdson. they was as high-toned and well 
born and rich and grand as the tribe of grangerfords. the shepherdsons 
and grangerfords used the same steamboat landing, which was about two 
mile above our house; so sometimes when i went up there with a lot of our 
folks i used to see a lot of the shepherdsons there on their fine horses. 
one day buck and me was away out in the woods hunting, and heard a horse 
coming. we was crossing the road. buck says: 
"quick! jump for the woods!" 
we done it, and then peeped down the woods through the leaves. pretty 
soon a splendid young man come galloping down the road, setting his horse 
easy and looking like a soldier. he had his gun across his pommel. i 
had seen him before. it was young harney shepherdson. i heard buck's 
gun go off at my ear, and harney's hat tumbled off from his head. he 
grabbed his gun and rode straight to the place where we was hid. but we 
didn't wait. we started through the woods on a run. the woods warn't 
thick, so i looked over my shoulder to dodge the bullet, and twice i seen 
harney cover buck with his gun; and then he rode away the way he come-to 
get his hat, i reckon, but i couldn't see. we never stopped running till 
we got home. the old gentleman's eyes blazed a minute-'twas pleasure, 
mainly, i judged-then his face sort of smoothed down, and he says, 
kind of gentle: 
"i don't like that shooting from behind a bush. why didn't you step into 
the road, my boy?" 
"the shepherdsons don't, father. they always take advantage." 
miss charlotte she held her head up like a queen while buck was telling 
his tale, and her nostrils spread and her eyes snapped. the two young 
men looked dark, but never said nothing. miss sophia she turned pale, 
but the color come back when she found the man warn't hurt. 
soon as i could get buck down by the corn-cribs under the trees by 
ourselves, i says: 
"did you want to kill him, buck?" 
"well, i bet i did." 
"what did he do to you?" 
"him? he never done nothing to me." 
"well, then, what did you want to kill him for?" 
"why, nothing-only it's on account of the feud." 
"what's a feud?" 
"why, where was you raised? don't you know what a feud is?" 
"never heard of it before-tell me about it." 
"well," says buck, "a feud is this way: a man has a quarrel with another 
man, and kills him; then that other man's brother kills him; then the 
other brothers, on both sides, goes for one another; then the cousins 
chip in-and by and by everybody's killed off, and there ain't no more 
feud. but it's kind of slow, and takes a long time." 
"has this one been going on long, buck?" 
"well, i should reckon! it started thirty year ago, or som'ers along 
there. there was trouble 'bout something, and then a lawsuit to settle 
it; and the suit went agin one of the men, and so he up and shot the man 
that won the suit-which he would naturally do, of course. anybody 
would." 
"what was the trouble about, buck?-land?" 
"i reckon maybe-i don't know." 
"well, who done the shooting? was it a grangerford or a shepherdson?" 
"laws, how do i know? it was so long ago." 
"don't anybody know?" 
"oh, yes, pa knows, i reckon, and some of the other old people; but they 
don't know now what the row was about in the first place." 
"has there been many killed, buck?" 
"yes; right smart chance of funerals. but they don't always kill. pa's 
got a few buckshot in him; but he don't mind it 'cuz he don't weigh much, 
anyway. bob's been carved up some with a bowie, and tom's been hurt once 
or twice." 
"has anybody been killed this year, buck?" 
"yes; we got one and they got one. 'bout three months ago my cousin bud, 
fourteen year old, was riding through the woods on t'other side of the 
river, and didn't have no weapon with him, which was blame' foolishness, 
and in a lonesome place he hears a horse a-coming behind him, and sees 
old baldy shepherdson a-linkin' after him with his gun in his hand and 
his white hair a-flying in the wind; and 'stead of jumping off and taking 
to the brush, bud 'lowed he could out-run him; so they had it, nip and 
tuck, for five mile or more, the old man a-gaining all the time; so at 
last bud seen it warn't any use, so he stopped and faced around so as to 
have the bullet holes in front, you know, and the old man he rode up and 
shot him down. but he didn't git much chance to enjoy his luck, for 
inside of a week our folks laid him out." 
"i reckon that old man was a coward, buck." 
"i reckon he warn't a coward. not by a blame' sight. there ain't a 
coward amongst them shepherdsons-not a one. and there ain't no cowards 
amongst the grangerfords either. why, that old man kep' up his end in a 
fight one day for half an hour against three grangerfords, and come out 
winner. they was all a-horseback; he lit off of his horse and got behind 
a little woodpile, and kep' his horse before him to stop the bullets; but 
the grangerfords stayed on their horses and capered around the old man, 
and peppered away at him, and he peppered away at them. him and his 
horse both went home pretty leaky and crippled, but the grangerfords had 
to be fetched home-and one of 'em was dead, and another died the next 
day. no, sir; if a body's out hunting for cowards he don't want to fool 
away any time amongst them shepherdsons, becuz they don't breed any of 
that kind." 
next sunday we all went to church, about three mile, everybody 
a-horseback. the men took their guns along, so did buck, and kept them 
between their knees or stood them handy against the wall. the 
shepherdsons done the same. it was pretty ornery preaching-all about 
brotherly love, and such-like tiresomeness; but everybody said it was a 
good sermon, and they all talked it over going home, and had such a 
powerful lot to say about faith and good works and free grace and 
preforeordestination, and i don't know what all, that it did seem to me 
to be one of the roughest sundays i had run across yet. 
about an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around, some in their 
chairs and some in their rooms, and it got to be pretty dull. buck and a 
dog was stretched out on the grass in the sun sound asleep. i went up to 
our room, and judged i would take a nap myself. i found that sweet miss 
sophia standing in her door, which was next to ours, and she took me in 
her room and shut the door very soft, and asked me if i liked her, and i 
said i did; and she asked me if i would do something for her and not tell 
anybody, and i said i would. then she said she'd forgot her testament, 
and left it in the seat at church between two other books, and would i 
slip out quiet and go there and fetch it to her, and not say nothing to 
nobody. i said i would. so i slid out and slipped off up the road, and 
there warn't anybody at the church, except maybe a hog or two, for there 
warn't any lock on the door, and hogs likes a puncheon floor in 
summer-time because it's cool. if you notice, most folks don't go 
to church only when they've got to; but a hog is different. 
says i to myself, something's up; it ain't natural for a girl to be in 
such a sweat about a testament. so i give it a shake, and out drops a 
little piece of paper with "half-past two" wrote on it with a pencil. i 
ransacked it, but couldn't find anything else. i couldn't make anything 
out of that, so i put the paper in the book again, and when i got home 
and upstairs there was miss sophia in her door waiting for me. she 
pulled me in and shut the door; then she looked in the testament till she 
found the paper, and as soon as she read it she looked glad; and before a 
body could think she grabbed me and give me a squeeze, and said i was the 
best boy in the world, and not to tell anybody. she was mighty red in 
the face for a minute, and her eyes lighted up, and it made her powerful 
pretty. i was a good deal astonished, but when i got my breath i asked 
her what the paper was about, and she asked me if i had read it, and i 
said no, and she asked me if i could read writing, and i told her "no, 
only coarse-hand," and then she said the paper warn't anything but a 
book-mark to keep her place, and i might go and play now. 
i went off down to the river, studying over this thing, and pretty soon i 
noticed that my nigger was following along behind. when we was out of 
sight of the house he looked back and around a second, and then comes 
a-running, and says: 
"mars jawge, if you'll come down into de swamp i'll show you a whole 
stack o' water-moccasins." 
thinks i, that's mighty curious; he said that yesterday. he oughter know 
a body don't love water-moccasins enough to go around hunting for them. 
what is he up to, anyway? so i says: 
"all right; trot ahead." 
i followed a half a mile; then he struck out over the swamp, and waded 
ankle deep as much as another half-mile. we come to a little flat piece 
of land which was dry and very thick with trees and bushes and vines, and 
he says: 
"you shove right in dah jist a few steps, mars jawge; dah's whah dey is. 
i's seed 'm befo'; i don't k'yer to see 'em no mo'." 
then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty soon the trees hid 
him. i poked into the place a-ways and come to a little open patch as 
big as a bedroom all hung around with vines, and found a man laying there 
asleep-and, by jings, it was my old jim! 
i waked him up, and i reckoned it was going to be a grand surprise to him 
to see me again, but it warn't. he nearly cried he was so glad, but he 
warn't surprised. said he swum along behind me that night, and heard me 
yell every time, but dasn't answer, because he didn't want nobody to pick 
him up and take him into slavery again. says he: 
"i got hurt a little, en couldn't swim fas', so i wuz a considable ways 
behine you towards de las'; when you landed i reck'ned i could ketch up 
wid you on de lan' 'dout havin' to shout at you, but when i see dat house 
i begin to go slow. i 'uz off too fur to hear what dey say to you-i wuz 
'fraid o' de dogs; but when it 'uz all quiet agin i knowed you's in de 
house, so i struck out for de woods to wait for day. early in de mawnin' 
some er de niggers come along, gwyne to de fields, en dey tuk me en 
showed me dis place, whah de dogs can't track me on accounts o' de water, 
en dey brings me truck to eat every night, en tells me how you's a-gitt'n 
along." 
"why didn't you tell my jack to fetch me here sooner, jim?" 
"well, 'twarn't no use to 'sturb you, huck, tell we could do sumfn-but 
we's all right now. i ben a-buyin' pots en pans en vittles, as i got a 
chanst, en a-patchin' up de raf' nights when-" 
"what raft, jim?" 
"our ole raf'." 
"you mean to say our old raft warn't smashed all to flinders?" 
"no, she warn't. she was tore up a good deal-one en' of her was; but 
dey warn't no great harm done, on'y our traps was mos' all los'. ef we 
hadn' dive' so deep en swum so fur under water, en de night hadn' ben so 
dark, en we warn't so sk'yerd, en ben sich punkin-heads, as de sayin' is, 
we'd a seed de raf'. but it's jis' as well we didn't, 'kase now she's 
all fixed up agin mos' as good as new, en we's got a new lot o' stuff, in 
de place o' what 'uz los'." 
"why, how did you get hold of the raft again, jim-did you catch her?" 
"how i gwyne to ketch her en i out in de woods? no; some er de niggers 
foun' her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben', en dey hid her in a 
crick 'mongst de willows, en dey wuz so much jawin' 'bout which un 'um 
she b'long to de mos' dat i come to heah 'bout it pooty soon, so i ups en 
settles de trouble by tellin' 'um she don't b'long to none uv um, but to 
you en me; en i ast 'm if dey gwyne to grab a young white genlman's 
propaty, en git a hid'n for it? den i gin 'm ten cents apiece, en dey 
'uz mighty well satisfied, en wisht some mo' raf's 'ud come along en make 
'm rich agin. dey's mighty good to me, dese niggers is, en whatever i 
wants 'm to do fur me i doan' have to ast 'm twice, honey. dat jack's a 
good nigger, en pooty smart." 
"yes, he is. he ain't ever told me you was here; told me to come, and 
he'd show me a lot of water-moccasins. if anything happens he ain't 
mixed up in it. he can say he never seen us together, and it 'll be the 
truth." 
i don't want to talk much about the next day. i reckon i'll cut it 
pretty short. i waked up about dawn, and was a-going to turn over and go 
to sleep again when i noticed how still it was-didn't seem to be anybody 
stirring. that warn't usual. next i noticed that buck was up and gone. 
well, i gets up, a-wondering, and goes down stairs-nobody around; 
everything as still as a mouse. just the same outside. thinks i, what 
does it mean? down by the wood-pile i comes across my jack, and says: 
"what's it all about?" 
says he: 
"don't you know, mars jawge?" 
"no," says i, "i don't." 
"well, den, miss sophia's run off! 'deed she has. she run off in de 
night some time-nobody don't know jis' when; run off to get married to 
dat young harney shepherdson, you know-leastways, so dey 'spec. de 
fambly foun' it out 'bout half an hour ago-maybe a little mo'-en' i 
tell you dey warn't no time los'. sich another hurryin' up guns en 
hosses you never see! de women folks has gone for to stir up de 
relations, en ole mars saul en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de river 
road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him 'fo' he kin git acrost 
de river wid miss sophia. i reck'n dey's gwyne to be mighty rough 
times." 
"buck went off 'thout waking me up." 
"well, i reck'n he did! dey warn't gwyne to mix you up in it. mars buck 
he loaded up his gun en 'lowed he's gwyne to fetch home a shepherdson or 
bust. well, dey'll be plenty un 'm dah, i reck'n, en you bet you he'll 
fetch one ef he gits a chanst." 
i took up the river road as hard as i could put. by and by i begin to 
hear guns a good ways off. when i came in sight of the log store and the 
woodpile where the steamboats lands i worked along under the trees and 
brush till i got to a good place, and then i clumb up into the forks of a 
cottonwood that was out of reach, and watched. there was a wood-rank 
four foot high a little ways in front of the tree, and first i was going 
to hide behind that; but maybe it was luckier i didn't. 
there was four or five men cavorting around on their horses in the open 
place before the log store, cussing and yelling, and trying to get at a 
couple of young chaps that was behind the wood-rank alongside of the 
steamboat landing; but they couldn't come it. every time one of them 
showed himself on the river side of the woodpile he got shot at. the two 
boys was squatting back to back behind the pile, so they could watch both 
ways. 
by and by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling. they started 
riding towards the store; then up gets one of the boys, draws a steady 
bead over the wood-rank, and drops one of them out of his saddle. all 
the men jumped off of their horses and grabbed the hurt one and started 
to carry him to the store; and that minute the two boys started on the 
run. they got half way to the tree i was in before the men noticed. 
then the men see them, and jumped on their horses and took out after 
them. they gained on the boys, but it didn't do no good, the boys had 
too good a start; they got to the woodpile that was in front of my tree, 
and slipped in behind it, and so they had the bulge on the men again. 
one of the boys was buck, and the other was a slim young chap about 
nineteen years old. 
the men ripped around awhile, and then rode away. as soon as they was 
out of sight i sung out to buck and told him. he didn't know what to 
make of my voice coming out of the tree at first. he was awful 
surprised. he told me to watch out sharp and let him know when the men 
come in sight again; said they was up to some devilment or other 
wouldn't be gone long. i wished i was out of that tree, but i dasn't 
come down. buck begun to cry and rip, and 'lowed that him and his cousin 
joe (that was the other young chap) would make up for this day yet. he 
said his father and his two brothers was killed, and two or three of the 
enemy. said the shepherdsons laid for them in ambush. buck said his 
father and brothers ought to waited for their relations-the shepherdsons 
was too strong for them. i asked him what was become of young harney and 
miss sophia. he said they'd got across the river and was safe. i was 
glad of that; but the way buck did take on because he didn't manage to 
kill harney that day he shot at him-i hain't ever heard anything like 
it. 
all of a sudden, bang! bang! bang! goes three or four guns-the men had 
slipped around through the woods and come in from behind without their 
horses! the boys jumped for the river-both of them hurt-and as they 
swum down the current the men run along the bank shooting at them and 
singing out, "kill them, kill them!" it made me so sick i most fell out 
of the tree. i ain't a-going to tell all that happened-it would make me 
sick again if i was to do that. i wished i hadn't ever come ashore that 
night to see such things. i ain't ever going to get shut of them-lots 
of times i dream about them. 
i stayed in the tree till it begun to get dark, afraid to come down. 
sometimes i heard guns away off in the woods; and twice i seen little 
gangs of men gallop past the log store with guns; so i reckoned the 
trouble was still a-going on. i was mighty downhearted; so i made up my 
mind i wouldn't ever go anear that house again, because i reckoned i was 
to blame, somehow. i judged that that piece of paper meant that miss 
sophia was to meet harney somewheres at half-past two and run off; and i 
judged i ought to told her father about that paper and the curious way 
she acted, and then maybe he would a locked her up, and this awful mess 
wouldn't ever happened. 
when i got down out of the tree i crept along down the river bank a 
piece, and found the two bodies laying in the edge of the water, and 
tugged at them till i got them ashore; then i covered up their faces, and 
got away as quick as i could. i cried a little when i was covering up 
buck's face, for he was mighty good to me. 
it was just dark now. i never went near the house, but struck through 
the woods and made for the swamp. jim warn't on his island, so i tramped 
off in a hurry for the crick, and crowded through the willows, red-hot to 
jump aboard and get out of that awful country. the raft was gone! my 
souls, but i was scared! i couldn't get my breath for most a minute. 
then i raised a yell. a voice not twenty-five foot from me says: 
"good lan'! is dat you, honey? doan' make no noise." 
it was jim's voice-nothing ever sounded so good before. i run along the 
bank a piece and got aboard, and jim he grabbed me and hugged me, he was 
so glad to see me. he says: 
"laws bless you, chile, i 'uz right down sho' you's dead agin. jack's 
been heah; he say he reck'n you's ben shot, kase you didn' come home no 
mo'; so i's jes' dis minute a startin' de raf' down towards de mouf er de 
crick, so's to be all ready for to shove out en leave soon as jack comes 
agin en tells me for certain you is dead. lawsy, i's mighty glad to git 
you back again, honey." 
i says: 
"all right-that's mighty good; they won't find me, and they'll think 
i've been killed, and floated down the river-there's something up there 
that 'll help them think so-so don't you lose no time, jim, but just 
shove off for the big water as fast as ever you can." 
i never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and out in the 
middle of the mississippi. then we hung up our signal lantern, and 
judged that we was free and safe once more. i hadn't had a bite to eat 
since yesterday, so jim he got out some corn-dodgers and buttermilk, and 
pork and cabbage and greens-there ain't nothing in the world so good 
when it's cooked right-and whilst i eat my supper we talked and had a 
good time. i was powerful glad to get away from the feuds, and so was 
jim to get away from the swamp. we said there warn't no home like a 
raft, after all. other places do seem so cramped up and smothery, but a 
raft don't. you feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft. 
chapter xix. 
two or three days and nights went by; i reckon i might say they swum by, 
they slid along so quiet and smooth and lovely. here is the way we put 
in the time. it was a monstrous big river down there-sometimes a mile 
and a half wide; we run nights, and laid up and hid daytimes; soon as 
night was most gone we stopped navigating and tied up-nearly always in 
the dead water under a towhead; and then cut young cottonwoods and 
willows, and hid the raft with them. then we set out the lines. next we 
slid into the river and had a swim, so as to freshen up and cool off; 
then we set down on the sandy bottom where the water was about knee deep, 
and watched the daylight come. not a sound anywheres-perfectly still 
just like the whole world was asleep, only sometimes the bullfrogs 
a-cluttering, maybe. the first thing to see, looking away over the water, 
was a kind of dull line-that was the woods on t'other side; you couldn't 
make nothing else out; then a pale place in the sky; then more paleness 
spreading around; then the river softened up away off, and warn't black 
any more, but gray; you could see little dark spots drifting along ever 
so far away-trading scows, and such things; and long black streaks 
rafts; sometimes you could hear a sweep screaking; or jumbled up voices, 
it was so still, and sounds come so far; and by and by you could see a 
streak on the water which you know by the look of the streak that there's 
a snag there in a swift current which breaks on it and makes that streak 
look that way; and you see the mist curl up off of the water, and the 
east reddens up, and the river, and you make out a log-cabin in the edge 
of the woods, away on the bank on t'other side of the river, being a 
woodyard, likely, and piled by them cheats so you can throw a dog through 
it anywheres; then the nice breeze springs up, and comes fanning you from 
over there, so cool and fresh and sweet to smell on account of the woods 
and the flowers; but sometimes not that way, because they've left dead 
fish laying around, gars and such, and they do get pretty rank; and next 
you've got the full day, and everything smiling in the sun, and the 
song-birds just going it! 
a little smoke couldn't be noticed now, so we would take some fish off of 
the lines and cook up a hot breakfast. and afterwards we would watch the 
lonesomeness of the river, and kind of lazy along, and by and by lazy off 
to sleep. wake up by and by, and look to see what done it, and maybe see 
a steamboat coughing along up-stream, so far off towards the other side 
you couldn't tell nothing about her only whether she was a stern-wheel or 
side-wheel; then for about an hour there wouldn't be nothing to hear nor 
nothing to see-just solid lonesomeness. next you'd see a raft sliding 
by, away off yonder, and maybe a galoot on it chopping, because they're 
most always doing it on a raft; you'd see the axe flash and come down 
you don't hear nothing; you see that axe go up again, and by the time 
it's above the man's head then you hear the k'chunk!-it had took all 
that time to come over the water. so we would put in the day, lazying 
around, listening to the stillness. once there was a thick fog, and the 
rafts and things that went by was beating tin pans so the steamboats 
wouldn't run over them. a scow or a raft went by so close we could hear 
them talking and cussing and laughing-heard them plain; but we couldn't 
see no sign of them; it made you feel crawly; it was like spirits 
carrying on that way in the air. jim said he believed it was spirits; 
but i says: 
"no; spirits wouldn't say, 'dern the dern fog.'" 
soon as it was night out we shoved; when we got her out to about the 
middle we let her alone, and let her float wherever the current wanted 
her to; then we lit the pipes, and dangled our legs in the water, and 
talked about all kinds of things-we was always naked, day and night, 
whenever the mosquitoes would let us-the new clothes buck's folks made 
for me was too good to be comfortable, and besides i didn't go much on 
clothes, nohow. 
sometimes we'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest 
time. yonder was the banks and the islands, across the water; and maybe a 
spark-which was a candle in a cabin window; and sometimes on the water 
you could see a spark or two-on a raft or a scow, you know; and maybe 
you could hear a fiddle or a song coming over from one of them crafts. 
it's lovely to live on a raft. we had the sky up there, all speckled 
with stars, and we used to lay on our backs and look up at them, and 
discuss about whether they was made or only just happened. jim he 
allowed they was made, but i allowed they happened; i judged it would 
have took too long to make so many. jim said the moon could a laid them; 
well, that looked kind of reasonable, so i didn't say nothing against it, 
because i've seen a frog lay most as many, so of course it could be done. 
we used to watch the stars that fell, too, and see them streak down. jim 
allowed they'd got spoiled and was hove out of the nest. 
once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping along in the 
dark, and now and then she would belch a whole world of sparks up out of 
her chimbleys, and they would rain down in the river and look awful 
pretty; then she would turn a corner and her lights would wink out and 
her powwow shut off and leave the river still again; and by and by her 
waves would get to us, a long time after she was gone, and joggle the 
raft a bit, and after that you wouldn't hear nothing for you couldn't 
tell how long, except maybe frogs or something. 
after midnight the people on shore went to bed, and then for two or three 
hours the shores was black-no more sparks in the cabin windows. these 
sparks was our clock-the first one that showed again meant morning was 
coming, so we hunted a place to hide and tie up right away. 
one morning about daybreak i found a canoe and crossed over a chute to 
the main shore-it was only two hundred yards-and paddled about a mile 
up a crick amongst the cypress woods, to see if i couldn't get some 
berries. just as i was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath crossed 
the crick, here comes a couple of men tearing up the path as tight as 
they could foot it. i thought i was a goner, for whenever anybody was 
after anybody i judged it was me-or maybe jim. i was about to dig out 
from there in a hurry, but they was pretty close to me then, and sung out 
and begged me to save their lives-said they hadn't been doing nothing, 
and was being chased for it-said there was men and dogs a-coming. they 
wanted to jump right in, but i says: 
"don't you do it. i don't hear the dogs and horses yet; you've got time 
to crowd through the brush and get up the crick a little ways; then you 
take to the water and wade down to me and get in-that'll throw the dogs 
off the scent." 
they done it, and soon as they was aboard i lit out for our towhead, and 
in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs and the men away off, 
shouting. we heard them come along towards the crick, but couldn't see 
them; they seemed to stop and fool around a while; then, as we got 
further and further away all the time, we couldn't hardly hear them at 
all; by the time we had left a mile of woods behind us and struck the 
river, everything was quiet, and we paddled over to the towhead and hid 
in the cottonwoods and was safe. 
one of these fellows was about seventy or upwards, and had a bald head 
and very gray whiskers. he had an old battered-up slouch hat on, and a 
greasy blue woollen shirt, and ragged old blue jeans britches stuffed 
into his boot-tops, and home-knit galluses-no, he only had one. he had 
an old long-tailed blue jeans coat with slick brass buttons flung over 
his arm, and both of them had big, fat, ratty-looking carpet-bags. 
the other fellow was about thirty, and dressed about as ornery. after 
breakfast we all laid off and talked, and the first thing that come out 
was that these chaps didn't know one another. 
"what got you into trouble?" says the baldhead to t'other chap. 
"well, i'd been selling an article to take the tartar off the teeth-and 
it does take it off, too, and generly the enamel along with it-but i 
stayed about one night longer than i ought to, and was just in the act of 
sliding out when i ran across you on the trail this side of town, and you 
told me they were coming, and begged me to help you to get off. so i 
told you i was expecting trouble myself, and would scatter out with you. 
that's the whole yarn-what's yourn? 
"well, i'd ben a-running' a little temperance revival thar 'bout a week, 
and was the pet of the women folks, big and little, for i was makin' it 
mighty warm for the rummies, i tell you, and takin' as much as five or 
six dollars a night-ten cents a head, children and niggers free-and 
business a-growin' all the time, when somehow or another a little report 
got around last night that i had a way of puttin' in my time with a 
private jug on the sly. a nigger rousted me out this mornin', and told 
me the people was getherin' on the quiet with their dogs and horses, and 
they'd be along pretty soon and give me 'bout half an hour's start, and 
then run me down if they could; and if they got me they'd tar and feather 
me and ride me on a rail, sure. i didn't wait for no breakfast-i warn't 
hungry." 
"old man," said the young one, "i reckon we might double-team it 
together; what do you think?" 
"i ain't undisposed. what's your line-mainly?" 
"jour printer by trade; do a little in patent medicines; theater-actor 
tragedy, you know; take a turn to mesmerism and phrenology when there's a 
chance; teach singing-geography school for a change; sling a lecture 
sometimes-oh, i do lots of things-most anything that comes handy, so it 
ain't work. what's your lay?" 
"i've done considerble in the doctoring way in my time. layin' on o' 
hands is my best holt-for cancer and paralysis, and sich things; and i 
k'n tell a fortune pretty good when i've got somebody along to find out 
the facts for me. preachin's my line, too, and workin' camp-meetin's, 
and missionaryin' around." 
nobody never said anything for a while; then the young man hove a sigh 
and says: 
"alas!" 
"what 're you alassin' about?" says the bald-head. 
"to think i should have lived to be leading such a life, and be degraded 
down into such company." and he begun to wipe the corner of his eye with 
a rag. 
"dern your skin, ain't the company good enough for you?" says the 
baldhead, pretty pert and uppish. 
"yes, it is good enough for me; it's as good as i deserve; for who 
fetched me so low when i was so high? i did myself. i don't blame you, 
gentlemen-far from it; i don't blame anybody. i deserve it all. let 
the cold world do its worst; one thing i know-there's a grave somewhere 
for me. the world may go on just as it's always done, and take everything 
from me-loved ones, property, everything; but it can't take that. 
some day i'll lie down in it and forget it all, and my poor broken heart 
will be at rest." he went on a-wiping. 
"drot your pore broken heart," says the baldhead; "what are you heaving 
your pore broken heart at us f'r? we hain't done nothing." 
"no, i know you haven't. i ain't blaming you, gentlemen. i brought 
myself down-yes, i did it myself. it's right i should suffer-perfectly 
right-i don't make any moan." 
"brought you down from whar? whar was you brought down from?" 
"ah, you would not believe me; the world never believes-let it pass 
'tis no matter. the secret of my birth-" 
"the secret of your birth! do you mean to say-" 
"gentlemen," says the young man, very solemn, "i will reveal it to you, 
for i feel i may have confidence in you. by rights i am a duke!" 
jim's eyes bugged out when he heard that; and i reckon mine did, too. 
then the baldhead says: "no! you can't mean it?" 
"yes. my great-grandfather, eldest son of the duke of bridgewater, fled 
to this country about the end of the last century, to breathe the pure 
air of freedom; married here, and died, leaving a son, his own father 
dying about the same time. the second son of the late duke seized the 
titles and estates-the infant real duke was ignored. i am the lineal 
descendant of that infant-i am the rightful duke of bridgewater; and 
here am i, forlorn, torn from my high estate, hunted of men, despised by 
the cold world, ragged, worn, heart-broken, and degraded to the 
companionship of felons on a raft!" 
jim pitied him ever so much, and so did i. we tried to comfort him, but 
he said it warn't much use, he couldn't be much comforted; said if we was 
a mind to acknowledge him, that would do him more good than most anything 
else; so we said we would, if he would tell us how. he said we ought to 
bow when we spoke to him, and say "your grace," or "my lord," or "your 
lordship"-and he wouldn't mind it if we called him plain 
"bridgewater," which, he said, was a title anyway, and not a name; and 
one of us ought to wait on him at dinner, and do any little thing for him 
he wanted done. 
well, that was all easy, so we done it. all through dinner jim stood 
around and waited on him, and says, "will yo' grace have some o' dis or 
some o' dat?" and so on, and a body could see it was mighty pleasing to 
him. 
but the old man got pretty silent by and by-didn't have much to say, and 
didn't look pretty comfortable over all that petting that was going on 
around that duke. he seemed to have something on his mind. so, along in 
the afternoon, he says: 
"looky here, bilgewater," he says, "i'm nation sorry for you, but you 
ain't the only person that's had troubles like that." 
"no?" 
"no you ain't. you ain't the only person that's ben snaked down 
wrongfully out'n a high place." 
"alas!" 
"no, you ain't the only person that's had a secret of his birth." and, 
by jings, he begins to cry. 
"hold! what do you mean?" 
"bilgewater, kin i trust you?" says the old man, still sort of sobbing. 
"to the bitter death!" he took the old man by the hand and squeezed it, 
and says, "that secret of your being: speak!" 
"bilgewater, i am the late dauphin!" 
you bet you, jim and me stared this time. then the duke says: 
"you are what?" 
"yes, my friend, it is too true-your eyes is lookin' at this very moment 
on the pore disappeared dauphin, looy the seventeen, son of looy the 
sixteen and marry antonette." 
"you! at your age! no! you mean you're the late charlemagne; you must 
be six or seven hundred years old, at the very least." 
"trouble has done it, bilgewater, trouble has done it; trouble has brung 
these gray hairs and this premature balditude. yes, gentlemen, you see 
before you, in blue jeans and misery, the wanderin', exiled, trampled-on, 
and sufferin' rightful king of france." 
well, he cried and took on so that me and jim didn't know hardly what to 
do, we was so sorry-and so glad and proud we'd got him with us, too. so 
we set in, like we done before with the duke, and tried to comfort him. 
but he said it warn't no use, nothing but to be dead and done with it all 
could do him any good; though he said it often made him feel easier and 
better for a while if people treated him according to his rights, and got 
down on one knee to speak to him, and always called him "your majesty," 
and waited on him first at meals, and didn't set down in his presence 
till he asked them. so jim and me set to majestying him, and doing this 
and that and t'other for him, and standing up till he told us we might 
set down. this done him heaps of good, and so he got cheerful and 
comfortable. but the duke kind of soured on him, and didn't look a bit 
satisfied with the way things was going; still, the king acted real 
friendly towards him, and said the duke's great-grandfather and all the 
other dukes of bilgewater was a good deal thought of by his father, and 
was allowed to come to the palace considerable; but the duke stayed huffy 
a good while, till by and by the king says: 
"like as not we got to be together a blamed long time on this h-yer raft, 
bilgewater, and so what's the use o' your bein' sour? it 'll only make 
things oncomfortable. it ain't my fault i warn't born a duke, it ain't 
your fault you warn't born a king-so what's the use to worry? make the 
best o' things the way you find 'em, says i-that's my motto. this ain't 
no bad thing that we've struck here-plenty grub and an easy life-come, 
give us your hand, duke, and le's all be friends." 
the duke done it, and jim and me was pretty glad to see it. it took away 
all the uncomfortableness and we felt mighty good over it, because it 
would a been a miserable business to have any unfriendliness on the raft; 
for what you want, above all things, on a raft, is for everybody to be 
satisfied, and feel right and kind towards the others. 
it didn't take me long to make up my mind that these liars warn't no 
kings nor dukes at all, but just low-down humbugs and frauds. but i 
never said nothing, never let on; kept it to myself; it's the best way; 
then you don't have no quarrels, and don't get into no trouble. if they 
wanted us to call them kings and dukes, i hadn't no objections, 'long as 
it would keep peace in the family; and it warn't no use to tell jim, so i 
didn't tell him. if i never learnt nothing else out of pap, i learnt 
that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let them 
have their own way. 
chapter xx. 
they asked us considerable many questions; wanted to know what we covered 
up the raft that way for, and laid by in the daytime instead of running 
was jim a runaway nigger? says i: 
"goodness sakes! would a runaway nigger run south?" 
no, they allowed he wouldn't. i had to account for things some way, so i 
says: 
"my folks was living in pike county, in missouri, where i was born, and 
they all died off but me and pa and my brother ike. pa, he 'lowed he'd 
break up and go down and live with uncle ben, who's got a little 
one-horse place on the river, forty-four mile below orleans. pa was 
pretty poor, and had some debts; so when he'd squared up there warn't 
nothing left but sixteen dollars and our nigger, jim. that warn't enough 
to take us fourteen hundred mile, deck passage nor no other way. well, 
when the river rose pa had a streak of luck one day; he ketched this 
piece of a raft; so we reckoned we'd go down to orleans on it. pa's luck 
didn't hold out; a steamboat run over the forrard corner of the raft one 
night, and we all went overboard and dove under the wheel; jim and me 
come up all right, but pa was drunk, and ike was only four years old, so 
they never come up no more. well, for the next day or two we had 
considerable trouble, because people was always coming out in skiffs and 
trying to take jim away from me, saying they believed he was a runaway 
nigger. we don't run daytimes no more now; nights they don't bother us." 
the duke says: 
"leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in the daytime if we 
want to. i'll think the thing over-i'll invent a plan that'll fix it. 
we'll let it alone for to-day, because of course we don't want to go by 
that town yonder in daylight-it mightn't be healthy." 
towards night it begun to darken up and look like rain; the heat 
lightning was squirting around low down in the sky, and the leaves was 
beginning to shiver-it was going to be pretty ugly, it was easy to see 
that. so the duke and the king went to overhauling our wigwam, to see 
what the beds was like. my bed was a straw tick better than jim's, which 
was a corn-shuck tick; there's always cobs around about in a shuck tick, 
and they poke into you and hurt; and when you roll over the dry shucks 
sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves; it makes such a 
rustling that you wake up. well, the duke allowed he would take my bed; 
but the king allowed he wouldn't. he says: 
"i should a reckoned the difference in rank would a sejested to you that 
a corn-shuck bed warn't just fitten for me to sleep on. your grace 'll 
take the shuck bed yourself." 
jim and me was in a sweat again for a minute, being afraid there was 
going to be some more trouble amongst them; so we was pretty glad when 
the duke says: 
"'tis my fate to be always ground into the mire under the iron heel of 
oppression. misfortune has broken my once haughty spirit; i yield, i 
submit; 'tis my fate. i am alone in the world-let me suffer; can bear 
it." 
we got away as soon as it was good and dark. the king told us to stand 
well out towards the middle of the river, and not show a light till we 
got a long ways below the town. we come in sight of the little bunch of 
lights by and by-that was the town, you know-and slid by, about a half 
a mile out, all right. when we was three-quarters of a mile below we 
hoisted up our signal lantern; and about ten o'clock it come on to rain 
and blow and thunder and lighten like everything; so the king told us to 
both stay on watch till the weather got better; then him and the duke 
crawled into the wigwam and turned in for the night. it was my watch 
below till twelve, but i wouldn't a turned in anyway if i'd had a bed, 
because a body don't see such a storm as that every day in the week, not 
by a long sight. my souls, how the wind did scream along! and every 
second or two there'd come a glare that lit up the white-caps for a half 
a mile around, and you'd see the islands looking dusty through the rain, 
and the trees thrashing around in the wind; then comes a h-whack!-bum! 
bum! bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-bum-bum-and the thunder would go rumbling 
and grumbling away, and quit-and then rip comes another flash and 
another sockdolager. the waves most washed me off the raft sometimes, 
but i hadn't any clothes on, and didn't mind. we didn't have no trouble 
about snags; the lightning was glaring and flittering around so constant 
that we could see them plenty soon enough to throw her head this way or 
that and miss them. 
i had the middle watch, you know, but i was pretty sleepy by that time, 
so jim he said he would stand the first half of it for me; he was always 
mighty good that way, jim was. i crawled into the wigwam, but the king 
and the duke had their legs sprawled around so there warn't no show for 
me; so i laid outside-i didn't mind the rain, because it was warm, and 
the waves warn't running so high now. about two they come up again, 
though, and jim was going to call me; but he changed his mind, because he 
reckoned they warn't high enough yet to do any harm; but he was mistaken 
about that, for pretty soon all of a sudden along comes a regular ripper 
and washed me overboard. it most killed jim a-laughing. he was the 
easiest nigger to laugh that ever was, anyway. 
i took the watch, and jim he laid down and snored away; and by and by the 
storm let up for good and all; and the first cabin-light that showed i 
rousted him out, and we slid the raft into hiding quarters for the day. 
the king got out an old ratty deck of cards after breakfast, and him and 
the duke played seven-up a while, five cents a game. then they got tired 
of it, and allowed they would "lay out a campaign," as they called it. 
the duke went down into his carpet-bag, and fetched up a lot of little 
printed bills and read them out loud. one bill said, "the celebrated dr. 
armand de montalban, of paris," would "lecture on the science of 
phrenology" at such and such a place, on the blank day of blank, at ten 
cents admission, and "furnish charts of character at twenty-five cents 
apiece." the duke said that was him. in another bill he was the 
"world-renowned shakespearian tragedian, garrick the younger, of drury 
lane, london." in other bills he had a lot of other names and done other 
wonderful things, like finding water and gold with a "divining-rod," 
"dissipating witch spells," and so on. by and by he says: 
"but the histrionic muse is the darling. have you ever trod the boards, 
royalty?" 
"no," says the king. 
"you shall, then, before you're three days older, fallen grandeur," says 
the duke. "the first good town we come to we'll hire a hall and do the 
sword fight in richard iii. and the balcony scene in romeo and juliet. 
how does that strike you?" 
"i'm in, up to the hub, for anything that will pay, bilgewater; but, you 
see, i don't know nothing about play-actin', and hain't ever seen much of 
it. i was too small when pap used to have 'em at the palace. do you 
reckon you can learn me?" 
"easy!" 
"all right. i'm jist a-freezn' for something fresh, anyway. le's 
commence right away." 
so the duke he told him all about who romeo was and who juliet was, and 
said he was used to being romeo, so the king could be juliet. 
"but if juliet's such a young gal, duke, my peeled head and my white 
whiskers is goin' to look oncommon odd on her, maybe." 
"no, don't you worry; these country jakes won't ever think of that. 
besides, you know, you'll be in costume, and that makes all the 
difference in the world; juliet's in a balcony, enjoying the moonlight 
before she goes to bed, and she's got on her night-gown and her ruffled 
nightcap. here are the costumes for the parts." 
he got out two or three curtain-calico suits, which he said was meedyevil 
armor for richard iii. and t'other chap, and a long white cotton 
nightshirt and a ruffled nightcap to match. the king was satisfied; so 
the duke got out his book and read the parts over in the most splendid 
spread-eagle way, prancing around and acting at the same time, to show 
how it had got to be done; then he give the book to the king and told him 
to get his part by heart. 
there was a little one-horse town about three mile down the bend, and 
after dinner the duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to run 
in daylight without it being dangersome for jim; so he allowed he would 
go down to the town and fix that thing. the king allowed he would go, 
too, and see if he couldn't strike something. we was out of coffee, so 
jim said i better go along with them in the canoe and get some. 
when we got there there warn't nobody stirring; streets empty, and 
perfectly dead and still, like sunday. we found a sick nigger sunning 
himself in a back yard, and he said everybody that warn't too young or 
too sick or too old was gone to camp-meeting, about two mile back in the 
woods. the king got the directions, and allowed he'd go and work that 
camp-meeting for all it was worth, and i might go, too. 
the duke said what he was after was a printing-office. we found it; a 
little bit of a concern, up over a carpenter shop-carpenters and 
printers all gone to the meeting, and no doors locked. it was a dirty, 
littered-up place, and had ink marks, and handbills with pictures of 
horses and runaway niggers on them, all over the walls. the duke shed 
his coat and said he was all right now. so me and the king lit out for 
the camp-meeting. 
we got there in about a half an hour fairly dripping, for it was a most 
awful hot day. there was as much as a thousand people there from twenty 
mile around. the woods was full of teams and wagons, hitched 
everywheres, feeding out of the wagon-troughs and stomping to keep off 
the flies. there was sheds made out of poles and roofed over with 
branches, where they had lemonade and gingerbread to sell, and piles of 
watermelons and green corn and such-like truck. 
the preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds, only they was 
bigger and held crowds of people. the benches was made out of outside 
slabs of logs, with holes bored in the round side to drive sticks into 
for legs. they didn't have no backs. the preachers had high platforms to 
stand on at one end of the sheds. the women had on sun-bonnets; and some 
had linsey-woolsey frocks, some gingham ones, and a few of the young ones 
had on calico. some of the young men was barefooted, and some of the 
children didn't have on any clothes but just a tow-linen shirt. some of 
the old women was knitting, and some of the young folks was courting on 
the sly. 
the first shed we come to the preacher was lining out a hymn. he lined 
out two lines, everybody sung it, and it was kind of grand to hear it, 
there was so many of them and they done it in such a rousing way; then he 
lined out two more for them to sing-and so on. the people woke up more 
and more, and sung louder and louder; and towards the end some begun to 
groan, and some begun to shout. then the preacher begun to preach, and 
begun in earnest, too; and went weaving first to one side of the platform 
and then the other, and then a-leaning down over the front of it, with 
his arms and his body going all the time, and shouting his words out with 
all his might; and every now and then he would hold up his bible and 
spread it open, and kind of pass it around this way and that, shouting, 
"it's the brazen serpent in the wilderness! look upon it and live!" and 
people would shout out, "glory!-a-a-men!" and so he went on, and the 
people groaning and crying and saying amen: 
"oh, come to the mourners' bench! come, black with sin! (amen!) come, 
sick and sore! (amen!) come, lame and halt and blind! (amen!) come, pore 
and needy, sunk in shame! (a-a-men!) come, all that's worn and soiled and 
suffering!-come with a broken spirit! come with a contrite heart! come 
in your rags and sin and dirt! the waters that cleanse is free, the door 
of heaven stands open-oh, enter in and be at rest!" (a-a-men! glory, 
glory hallelujah!) 
and so on. you couldn't make out what the preacher said any more, on 
account of the shouting and crying. folks got up everywheres in the 
crowd, and worked their way just by main strength to the mourners' bench, 
with the tears running down their faces; and when all the mourners had 
got up there to the front benches in a crowd, they sung and shouted and 
flung themselves down on the straw, just crazy and wild. 
well, the first i knowed the king got a-going, and you could hear him 
over everybody; and next he went a-charging up on to the platform, and 
the preacher he begged him to speak to the people, and he done it. he 
told them he was a pirate-been a pirate for thirty years out in the 
indian ocean-and his crew was thinned out considerable last spring in 
a fight, and he was home now to take out some fresh men, and thanks to 
goodness he'd been robbed last night and put ashore off of a steamboat 
without a cent, and he was glad of it; it was the blessedest thing that 
ever happened to him, because he was a changed man now, and happy for the 
first time in his life; and, poor as he was, he was going to start right 
off and work his way back to the indian ocean, and put in the rest of his 
life trying to turn the pirates into the true path; for he could do it 
better than anybody else, being acquainted with all pirate crews in that 
ocean; and though it would take him a long time to get there without 
money, he would get there anyway, and every time he convinced a pirate he 
would say to him, "don't you thank me, don't you give me no credit; it 
all belongs to them dear people in pokeville camp-meeting, natural 
brothers and benefactors of the race, and that dear preacher there, the 
truest friend a pirate ever had!" 
and then he busted into tears, and so did everybody. then somebody sings 
out, "take up a collection for him, take up a collection!" well, a half 
a dozen made a jump to do it, but somebody sings out, "let him pass the 
hat around!" then everybody said it, the preacher too. 
so the king went all through the crowd with his hat swabbing his eyes, 
and blessing the people and praising them and thanking them for being so 
good to the poor pirates away off there; and every little while the 
prettiest kind of girls, with the tears running down their cheeks, would 
up and ask him would he let them kiss him for to remember him by; and he 
always done it; and some of them he hugged and kissed as many as five or 
six times-and he was invited to stay a week; and everybody wanted him to 
live in their houses, and said they'd think it was an honor; but he said 
as this was the last day of the camp-meeting he couldn't do no good, and 
besides he was in a sweat to get to the indian ocean right off and go to 
work on the pirates. 
when we got back to the raft and he come to count up he found he had 
collected eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five cents. and then he had 
fetched away a three-gallon jug of whisky, too, that he found under a 
wagon when he was starting home through the woods. the king said, take 
it all around, it laid over any day he'd ever put in in the missionarying 
line. he said it warn't no use talking, heathens don't amount to shucks 
alongside of pirates to work a camp-meeting with. 
the duke was thinking he'd been doing pretty well till the king come to 
show up, but after that he didn't think so so much. he had set up and 
printed off two little jobs for farmers in that printing-office-horse 
bills-and took the money, four dollars. and he had got in ten 
dollars' worth of advertisements for the paper, which he said he would 
put in for four dollars if they would pay in advance-so they done it. 
the price of the paper was two dollars a year, but he took in three 
subscriptions for half a dollar apiece on condition of them paying him in 
advance; they were going to pay in cordwood and onions as usual, but he 
said he had just bought the concern and knocked down the price as low as 
he could afford it, and was going to run it for cash. he set up a little 
piece of poetry, which he made, himself, out of his own head-three 
verses-kind of sweet and saddish-the name of it was, "yes, crush, cold 
world, this breaking heart"-and he left that all set up and ready to 
print in the paper, and didn't charge nothing for it. well, he took in 
nine dollars and a half, and said he'd done a pretty square day's work 
for it. 
then he showed us another little job he'd printed and hadn't charged for, 
because it was for us. it had a picture of a runaway nigger with a 
bundle on a stick over his shoulder, and "$200 reward" under it. the 
reading was all about jim, and just described him to a dot. it said he 
run away from st. jacques' plantation, forty mile below new orleans, last 
winter, and likely went north, and whoever would catch him and send him 
back he could have the reward and expenses. 
"now," says the duke, "after to-night we can run in the daytime if we 
want to. whenever we see anybody coming we can tie jim hand and foot 
with a rope, and lay him in the wigwam and show this handbill and say we 
captured him up the river, and were too poor to travel on a steamboat, so 
we got this little raft on credit from our friends and are going down to 
get the reward. handcuffs and chains would look still better on jim, but 
it wouldn't go well with the story of us being so poor. too much like 
jewelry. ropes are the correct thing-we must preserve the unities, as 
we say on the boards." 
we all said the duke was pretty smart, and there couldn't be no trouble 
about running daytimes. we judged we could make miles enough that night 
to get out of the reach of the powwow we reckoned the duke's work in the 
printing office was going to make in that little town; then we could boom 
right along if we wanted to. 
we laid low and kept still, and never shoved out till nearly ten o'clock; 
then we slid by, pretty wide away from the town, and didn't hoist our 
lantern till we was clear out of sight of it. 
when jim called me to take the watch at four in the morning, he says: 
"huck, does you reck'n we gwyne to run acrost any mo' kings on dis trip?" 
"no," i says, "i reckon not." 
"well," says he, "dat's all right, den. i doan' mine one er two kings, 
but dat's enough. dis one's powerful drunk, en de duke ain' much 
better." 
i found jim had been trying to get him to talk french, so he could hear 
what it was like; but he said he had been in this country so long, and 
had so much trouble, he'd forgot it. 
chapter xxi. 
it was after sun-up now, but we went right on and didn't tie up. the 
king and the duke turned out by and by looking pretty rusty; but after 
they'd jumped overboard and took a swim it chippered them up a good deal. 
after breakfast the king he took a seat on the corner of the raft, and 
pulled off his boots and rolled up his britches, and let his legs dangle 
in the water, so as to be comfortable, and lit his pipe, and went to 
getting his romeo and juliet by heart. when he had got it pretty good 
him and the duke begun to practice it together. the duke had to learn 
him over and over again how to say every speech; and he made him sigh, 
and put his hand on his heart, and after a while he said he done it 
pretty well; "only," he says, "you mustn't bellow out romeo! that way, 
like a bull-you must say it soft and sick and languishy, so-r-o-o-meo! 
that is the idea; for juliet's a dear sweet mere child of a girl, you 
know, and she doesn't bray like a jackass." 
well, next they got out a couple of long swords that the duke made out of 
oak laths, and begun to practice the sword fight-the duke called himself 
richard iii.; and the way they laid on and pranced around the raft was 
grand to see. but by and by the king tripped and fell overboard, and 
after that they took a rest, and had a talk about all kinds of adventures 
they'd had in other times along the river. 
after dinner the duke says: 
"well, capet, we'll want to make this a first-class show, you know, so i 
guess we'll add a little more to it. we want a little something to 
answer encores with, anyway." 
"what's onkores, bilgewater?" 
the duke told him, and then says: 
"i'll answer by doing the highland fling or the sailor's hornpipe; and 
you-well, let me see-oh, i've got it-you can do hamlet's soliloquy." 
"hamlet's which?" 
"hamlet's soliloquy, you know; the most celebrated thing in shakespeare. 
ah, it's sublime, sublime! always fetches the house. i haven't got it 
in the book-i've only got one volume-but i reckon i can piece it out 
from memory. i'll just walk up and down a minute, and see if i can call 
it back from recollection's vaults." 
so he went to marching up and down, thinking, and frowning horrible every 
now and then; then he would hoist up his eyebrows; next he would squeeze 
his hand on his forehead and stagger back and kind of moan; next he would 
sigh, and next he'd let on to drop a tear. it was beautiful to see him. 
by and by he got it. he told us to give attention. then he strikes a 
most noble attitude, with one leg shoved forwards, and his arms stretched 
away up, and his head tilted back, looking up at the sky; and then he 
begins to rip and rave and grit his teeth; and after that, all through 
his speech, he howled, and spread around, and swelled up his chest, and 
just knocked the spots out of any acting ever i see before. this is the 
speech-i learned it, easy enough, while he was learning it to the king: 
to be, or not to be; that is the bare bodkin that makes calamity of so 
long life; for who would fardels bear, till birnam wood do come to 
dunsinane, but that the fear of something after death murders the 
innocent sleep, great nature's second course, and makes us rather sling 
the arrows of outrageous fortune than fly to others that we know not of. 
there's the respect must give us pause: wake duncan with thy knocking! i 
would thou couldst; for who would bear the whips and scorns of time, the 
oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, the law's delay, and the 
quietus which his pangs might take, in the dead waste and middle of the 
night, when churchyards yawn in customary suits of solemn black, but that 
the undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveler returns, breathes 
forth contagion on the world, and thus the native hue of resolution, like 
the poor cat i' the adage, is sicklied o'er with care, and all the clouds 
that lowered o'er our housetops, with this regard their currents turn 
awry, and lose the name of action. 'tis a consummation devoutly to be 
wished. but soft you, the fair ophelia: ope not thy ponderous and marble 
jaws, but get thee to a nunnery-go! 
well, the old man he liked that speech, and he mighty soon got it so he 
could do it first-rate. it seemed like he was just born for it; and when 
he had his hand in and was excited, it was perfectly lovely the way he 
would rip and tear and rair up behind when he was getting it off. 
the first chance we got the duke he had some showbills printed; and after 
that, for two or three days as we floated along, the raft was a most 
uncommon lively place, for there warn't nothing but sword fighting and 
rehearsing-as the duke called it-going on all the time. one morning, 
when we was pretty well down the state of arkansaw, we come in sight of a 
little one-horse town in a big bend; so we tied up about three-quarters 
of a mile above it, in the mouth of a crick which was shut in like a 
tunnel by the cypress trees, and all of us but jim took the canoe and 
went down there to see if there was any chance in that place for our 
show. 
we struck it mighty lucky; there was going to be a circus there that 
afternoon, and the country people was already beginning to come in, in 
all kinds of old shackly wagons, and on horses. the circus would leave 
before night, so our show would have a pretty good chance. the duke he 
hired the courthouse, and we went around and stuck up our bills. they 
read like this: 
shaksperean revival ! ! ! 
wonderful attraction! 
for one night only! 
the world renowned tragedians, david garrick the younger, of drury lane 
theatre london, and edmund kean the elder, of the royal haymarket 
theatre, whitechapel, pudding lane, piccadilly, london, and the royal 
continental theatres, in their sublime shaksperean spectacle entitled 
the balcony scene in romeo and juliet ! ! ! 
romeo...................mr. garrick 
juliet..................mr. kean 
assisted by the whole strength of the company! 
new costumes, new scenes, new appointments! 
also: the thrilling, masterly, and blood-curdling 
broad-sword conflict in richard iii. ! ! ! 
richard iii.............mr. garrick 
richmond................mr. kean 
also: (by special request) hamlet's immortal soliloquy ! ! 
by the illustrious kean! done by him 300 consecutive nights in paris! 
for one night only, on account of imperative european engagements! 
admission 25 cents; children and servants, 10 cents. 
then we went loafing around town. the stores and houses was most all 
old, shackly, dried up frame concerns that hadn't ever been painted; they 
was set up three or four foot above ground on stilts, so as to be out of 
reach of the water when the river was over-flowed. the houses had little 
gardens around them, but they didn't seem to raise hardly anything in 
them but jimpson-weeds, and sunflowers, and ash piles, and old curled-up 
boots and shoes, and pieces of bottles, and rags, and played-out tinware. 
the fences was made of different kinds of boards, nailed on at different 
times; and they leaned every which way, and had gates that didn't generly 
have but one hinge-a leather one. some of the fences had been 
white-washed some time or another, but the duke said it was in clumbus' 
time, like enough. there was generly hogs in the garden, and people 
driving them out. 
all the stores was along one street. they had white domestic awnings in 
front, and the country people hitched their horses to the awning-posts. 
there was empty drygoods boxes under the awnings, and loafers roosting on 
them all day long, whittling them with their barlow knives; and chawing 
tobacco, and gaping and yawning and stretching-a mighty ornery lot. 
they generly had on yellow straw hats most as wide as an umbrella, but 
didn't wear no coats nor waistcoats, they called one another bill, and 
buck, and hank, and joe, and andy, and talked lazy and drawly, and used 
considerable many cuss words. there was as many as one loafer leaning up 
against every awning-post, and he most always had his hands in his 
britches-pockets, except when he fetched them out to lend a chaw of 
tobacco or scratch. what a body was hearing amongst them all the time 
was: 
"gimme a chaw 'v tobacker, hank." 
"cain't; i hain't got but one chaw left. ask bill." 
maybe bill he gives him a chaw; maybe he lies and says he ain't got none. 
some of them kinds of loafers never has a cent in the world, nor a chaw 
of tobacco of their own. they get all their chawing by borrowing; they 
say to a fellow, "i wisht you'd len' me a chaw, jack, i jist this minute 
give ben thompson the last chaw i had"-which is a lie pretty much 
everytime; it don't fool nobody but a stranger; but jack ain't no 
stranger, so he says: 
"you give him a chaw, did you? so did your sister's cat's grandmother. 
you pay me back the chaws you've awready borry'd off'n me, lafe buckner, 
then i'll loan you one or two ton of it, and won't charge you no back 
intrust, nuther." 
"well, i did pay you back some of it wunst." 
"yes, you did-'bout six chaws. you borry'd store tobacker and paid back 
nigger-head." 
store tobacco is flat black plug, but these fellows mostly chaws the 
natural leaf twisted. when they borrow a chaw they don't generly cut it 
off with a knife, but set the plug in between their teeth, and gnaw with 
their teeth and tug at the plug with their hands till they get it in two; 
then sometimes the one that owns the tobacco looks mournful at it when 
it's handed back, and says, sarcastic: 
"here, gimme the chaw, and you take the plug." 
all the streets and lanes was just mud; they warn't nothing else but mud 
mud as black as tar and nigh about a foot deep in some places, and two 
or three inches deep in all the places. the hogs loafed and grunted 
around everywheres. you'd see a muddy sow and a litter of pigs come 
lazying along the street and whollop herself right down in the way, where 
folks had to walk around her, and she'd stretch out and shut her eyes and 
wave her ears whilst the pigs was milking her, and look as happy as if 
she was on salary. and pretty soon you'd hear a loafer sing out, "hi! so 
boy! sick him, tige!" and away the sow would go, squealing most horrible, 
with a dog or two swinging to each ear, and three or four dozen more 
a-coming; and then you would see all the loafers get up and watch the thing 
out of sight, and laugh at the fun and look grateful for the noise. then 
they'd settle back again till there was a dog fight. there couldn't 
anything wake them up all over, and make them happy all over, like a dog 
fight-unless it might be putting turpentine on a stray dog and setting 
fire to him, or tying a tin pan to his tail and see him run himself to 
death. 
on the river front some of the houses was sticking out over the bank, and 
they was bowed and bent, and about ready to tumble in, the people had 
moved out of them. the bank was caved away under one corner of some 
others, and that corner was hanging over. people lived in them yet, but 
it was dangersome, because sometimes a strip of land as wide as a house 
caves in at a time. sometimes a belt of land a quarter of a mile deep 
will start in and cave along and cave along till it all caves into the 
river in one summer. such a town as that has to be always moving back, 
and back, and back, because the river's always gnawing at it. 
the nearer it got to noon that day the thicker and thicker was the wagons 
and horses in the streets, and more coming all the time. families 
fetched their dinners with them from the country, and eat them in the 
wagons. there was considerable whisky drinking going on, and i seen 
three fights. by and by somebody sings out: 
"here comes old boggs!-in from the country for his little old monthly 
drunk; here he comes, boys!" 
all the loafers looked glad; i reckoned they was used to having fun out 
of boggs. one of them says: 
"wonder who he's a-gwyne to chaw up this time. if he'd a-chawed up all 
the men he's ben a-gwyne to chaw up in the last twenty year he'd have 
considerable ruputation now." 
another one says, "i wisht old boggs 'd threaten me, 'cuz then i'd know i 
warn't gwyne to die for a thousan' year." 
boggs comes a-tearing along on his horse, whooping and yelling like an 
injun, and singing out: 
"cler the track, thar. i'm on the waw-path, and the price uv coffins is 
a-gwyne to raise." 
he was drunk, and weaving about in his saddle; he was over fifty year 
old, and had a very red face. everybody yelled at him and laughed at him 
and sassed him, and he sassed back, and said he'd attend to them and lay 
them out in their regular turns, but he couldn't wait now because he'd 
come to town to kill old colonel sherburn, and his motto was, "meat 
first, and spoon vittles to top off on." 
he see me, and rode up and says: 
"whar'd you come f'm, boy? you prepared to die?" 
then he rode on. i was scared, but a man says: 
"he don't mean nothing; he's always a-carryin' on like that when he's 
drunk. he's the best naturedest old fool in arkansaw-never hurt nobody, 
drunk nor sober." 
boggs rode up before the biggest store in town, and bent his head down so 
he could see under the curtain of the awning and yells: 
"come out here, sherburn! come out and meet the man you've swindled. 
you're the houn' i'm after, and i'm a-gwyne to have you, too!" 
and so he went on, calling sherburn everything he could lay his tongue 
to, and the whole street packed with people listening and laughing and 
going on. by and by a proud-looking man about fifty-five-and he was a 
heap the best dressed man in that town, too-steps out of the store, and 
the crowd drops back on each side to let him come. he says to boggs, 
mighty ca'm and slow-he says: 
"i'm tired of this, but i'll endure it till one o'clock. till one 
o'clock, mind-no longer. if you open your mouth against me only once 
after that time you can't travel so far but i will find you." 
then he turns and goes in. the crowd looked mighty sober; nobody 
stirred, and there warn't no more laughing. boggs rode off blackguarding 
sherburn as loud as he could yell, all down the street; and pretty soon 
back he comes and stops before the store, still keeping it up. some men 
crowded around him and tried to get him to shut up, but he wouldn't; they 
told him it would be one o'clock in about fifteen minutes, and so he must 
go home-he must go right away. but it didn't do no good. he cussed 
away with all his might, and throwed his hat down in the mud and rode 
over it, and pretty soon away he went a-raging down the street again, 
with his gray hair a-flying. everybody that could get a chance at him 
tried their best to coax him off of his horse so they could lock him up 
and get him sober; but it warn't no use-up the street he would tear 
again, and give sherburn another cussing. by and by somebody says: 
"go for his daughter!-quick, go for his daughter; sometimes he'll listen 
to her. if anybody can persuade him, she can." 
so somebody started on a run. i walked down street a ways and stopped. 
in about five or ten minutes here comes boggs again, but not on his 
horse. he was a-reeling across the street towards me, bare-headed, with 
a friend on both sides of him a-holt of his arms and hurrying him along. 
he was quiet, and looked uneasy; and he warn't hanging back any, but was 
doing some of the hurrying himself. somebody sings out: 
"boggs!" 
i looked over there to see who said it, and it was that colonel sherburn. 
he was standing perfectly still in the street, and had a pistol raised in 
his right hand-not aiming it, but holding it out with the barrel tilted 
up towards the sky. the same second i see a young girl coming on the 
run, and two men with her. boggs and the men turned round to see who 
called him, and when they see the pistol the men jumped to one side, and 
the pistol-barrel come down slow and steady to a level-both barrels 
cocked. boggs throws up both of his hands and says, "o lord, don't 
shoot!" bang! goes the first shot, and he staggers back, clawing at the 
air-bang! goes the second one, and he tumbles backwards on to the 
ground, heavy and solid, with his arms spread out. that young girl 
screamed out and comes rushing, and down she throws herself on her 
father, crying, and saying, "oh, he's killed him, he's killed him!" the 
crowd closed up around them, and shouldered and jammed one another, with 
their necks stretched, trying to see, and people on the inside trying to 
shove them back and shouting, "back, back! give him air, give him air!" 
colonel sherburn he tossed his pistol on to the ground, and turned around 
on his heels and walked off. 
they took boggs to a little drug store, the crowd pressing around just 
the same, and the whole town following, and i rushed and got a good place 
at the window, where i was close to him and could see in. they laid him 
on the floor and put one large bible under his head, and opened another 
one and spread it on his breast; but they tore open his shirt first, and 
i seen where one of the bullets went in. he made about a dozen long 
gasps, his breast lifting the bible up when he drawed in his breath, and 
letting it down again when he breathed it out-and after that he laid 
still; he was dead. then they pulled his daughter away from him, 
screaming and crying, and took her off. she was about sixteen, and very 
sweet and gentle looking, but awful pale and scared. 
well, pretty soon the whole town was there, squirming and scrouging and 
pushing and shoving to get at the window and have a look, but people that 
had the places wouldn't give them up, and folks behind them was saying 
all the time, "say, now, you've looked enough, you fellows; 'tain't right 
and 'tain't fair for you to stay thar all the time, and never give nobody 
a chance; other folks has their rights as well as you." 
there was considerable jawing back, so i slid out, thinking maybe there 
was going to be trouble. the streets was full, and everybody was 
excited. everybody that seen the shooting was telling how it happened, 
and there was a big crowd packed around each one of these fellows, 
stretching their necks and listening. one long, lanky man, with long 
hair and a big white fur stovepipe hat on the back of his head, and a 
crooked-handled cane, marked out the places on the ground where boggs 
stood and where sherburn stood, and the people following him around from 
one place to t'other and watching everything he done, and bobbing their 
heads to show they understood, and stooping a little and resting their 
hands on their thighs to watch him mark the places on the ground with his 
cane; and then he stood up straight and stiff where sherburn had stood, 
frowning and having his hat-brim down over his eyes, and sung out, 
"boggs!" and then fetched his cane down slow to a level, and says "bang!" 
staggered backwards, says "bang!" again, and fell down flat on his back. 
the people that had seen the thing said he done it perfect; said it was 
just exactly the way it all happened. then as much as a dozen people got 
out their bottles and treated him. 
well, by and by somebody said sherburn ought to be lynched. in about a 
minute everybody was saying it; so away they went, mad and yelling, and 
snatching down every clothes-line they come to to do the hanging with. 
chapter xxii. 
they swarmed up towards sherburn's house, a-whooping and raging like 
injuns, and everything had to clear the way or get run over and tromped 
to mush, and it was awful to see. children was heeling it ahead of the 
mob, screaming and trying to get out of the way; and every window along 
the road was full of women's heads, and there was nigger boys in every 
tree, and bucks and wenches looking over every fence; and as soon as the 
mob would get nearly to them they would break and skaddle back out of 
reach. lots of the women and girls was crying and taking on, scared most 
to death. 
they swarmed up in front of sherburn's palings as thick as they could jam 
together, and you couldn't hear yourself think for the noise. it was a 
little twenty-foot yard. some sung out "tear down the fence! tear down 
the fence!" then there was a racket of ripping and tearing and smashing, 
and down she goes, and the front wall of the crowd begins to roll in like 
a wave. 
just then sherburn steps out on to the roof of his little front porch, 
with a double-barrel gun in his hand, and takes his stand, perfectly ca'm 
and deliberate, not saying a word. the racket stopped, and the wave 
sucked back. 
sherburn never said a word-just stood there, looking down. the 
stillness was awful creepy and uncomfortable. sherburn run his eye slow 
along the crowd; and wherever it struck the people tried a little to 
out-gaze him, but they couldn't; they dropped their eyes and looked sneaky. 
then pretty soon sherburn sort of laughed; not the pleasant kind, but the 
kind that makes you feel like when you are eating bread that's got sand 
in it. 
then he says, slow and scornful: 
"the idea of you lynching anybody! it's amusing. the idea of you 
thinking you had pluck enough to lynch a man! because you're brave 
enough to tar and feather poor friendless cast-out women that come along 
here, did that make you think you had grit enough to lay your hands on a 
man? why, a man's safe in the hands of ten thousand of your kind-as 
long as it's daytime and you're not behind him. 
"do i know you? i know you clear through was born and raised in the 
south, and i've lived in the north; so i know the average all around. 
the average man's a coward. in the north he lets anybody walk over him 
that wants to, and goes home and prays for a humble spirit to bear it. 
in the south one man all by himself, has stopped a stage full of men in 
the daytime, and robbed the lot. your newspapers call you a brave people 
so much that you think you are braver than any other people-whereas 
you're just as brave, and no braver. why don't your juries hang 
murderers? because they're afraid the man's friends will shoot them in 
the back, in the dark-and it's just what they would do. 
"so they always acquit; and then a man goes in the night, with a hundred 
masked cowards at his back and lynches the rascal. your mistake is, that 
you didn't bring a man with you; that's one mistake, and the other is 
that you didn't come in the dark and fetch your masks. you brought part 
of a man-buck harkness, there-and if you hadn't had him to start you, 
you'd a taken it out in blowing. 
"you didn't want to come. the average man don't like trouble and danger. 
you don't like trouble and danger. but if only half a man-like buck 
harkness, there-shouts 'lynch him! lynch him!' you're afraid to back 
down-afraid you'll be found out to be what you are-cowards-and so 
you raise a yell, and hang yourselves on to that half-a-man's coat-tail, 
and come raging up here, swearing what big things you're going to do. 
the pitifulest thing out is a mob; that's what an army is-a mob; they 
don't fight with courage that's born in them, but with courage that's 
borrowed from their mass, and from their officers. but a mob without any 
man at the head of it is beneath pitifulness. now the thing for you to 
do is to droop your tails and go home and crawl in a hole. if any real 
lynching's going to be done it will be done in the dark, southern 
fashion; and when they come they'll bring their masks, and fetch a man 
along. now leave-and take your half-a-man with you"-tossing his gun up 
across his left arm and cocking it when he says this. 
the crowd washed back sudden, and then broke all apart, and went tearing 
off every which way, and buck harkness he heeled it after them, looking 
tolerable cheap. i could a stayed if i wanted to, but i didn't want to. 
i went to the circus and loafed around the back side till the watchman 
went by, and then dived in under the tent. i had my twenty-dollar gold 
piece and some other money, but i reckoned i better save it, because 
there ain't no telling how soon you are going to need it, away from home 
and amongst strangers that way. you can't be too careful. i ain't 
opposed to spending money on circuses when there ain't no other way, but 
there ain't no use in wasting it on them. 
it was a real bully circus. it was the splendidest sight that ever was 
when they all come riding in, two and two, a gentleman and lady, side by 
side, the men just in their drawers and undershirts, and no shoes nor 
stirrups, and resting their hands on their thighs easy and comfortable 
there must a been twenty of them-and every lady with a lovely 
complexion, and perfectly beautiful, and looking just like a gang of real 
sure-enough queens, and dressed in clothes that cost millions of dollars, 
and just littered with diamonds. it was a powerful fine sight; i never 
see anything so lovely. and then one by one they got up and stood, and 
went a-weaving around the ring so gentle and wavy and graceful, the men 
looking ever so tall and airy and straight, with their heads bobbing and 
skimming along, away up there under the tent-roof, and every lady's 
rose-leafy dress flapping soft and silky around her hips, and she looking 
like the most loveliest parasol. 
and then faster and faster they went, all of them dancing, first one foot 
out in the air and then the other, the horses leaning more and more, and 
the ringmaster going round and round the center-pole, cracking his whip 
and shouting "hi!-hi!" and the clown cracking jokes behind him; and by 
and by all hands dropped the reins, and every lady put her knuckles on 
her hips and every gentleman folded his arms, and then how the horses did 
lean over and hump themselves! and so one after the other they all 
skipped off into the ring, and made the sweetest bow i ever see, and then 
scampered out, and everybody clapped their hands and went just about 
wild. 
well, all through the circus they done the most astonishing things; and 
all the time that clown carried on so it most killed the people. the 
ringmaster couldn't ever say a word to him but he was back at him quick 
as a wink with the funniest things a body ever said; and how he ever 
could think of so many of them, and so sudden and so pat, was what i 
couldn't noway understand. why, i couldn't a thought of them in a year. 
and by and by a drunk man tried to get into the ring-said he wanted to 
ride; said he could ride as well as anybody that ever was. they argued 
and tried to keep him out, but he wouldn't listen, and the whole show 
come to a standstill. then the people begun to holler at him and make 
fun of him, and that made him mad, and he begun to rip and tear; so that 
stirred up the people, and a lot of men begun to pile down off of the 
benches and swarm towards the ring, saying, "knock him down! throw him 
out!" and one or two women begun to scream. so, then, the ringmaster he 
made a little speech, and said he hoped there wouldn't be no disturbance, 
and if the man would promise he wouldn't make no more trouble he would 
let him ride if he thought he could stay on the horse. so everybody 
laughed and said all right, and the man got on. the minute he was on, the 
horse begun to rip and tear and jump and cavort around, with two circus 
men hanging on to his bridle trying to hold him, and the drunk man 
hanging on to his neck, and his heels flying in the air every jump, and 
the whole crowd of people standing up shouting and laughing till tears 
rolled down. and at last, sure enough, all the circus men could do, the 
horse broke loose, and away he went like the very nation, round and round 
the ring, with that sot laying down on him and hanging to his neck, with 
first one leg hanging most to the ground on one side, and then t'other 
one on t'other side, and the people just crazy. it warn't funny to me, 
though; i was all of a tremble to see his danger. but pretty soon he 
struggled up astraddle and grabbed the bridle, a-reeling this way and 
that; and the next minute he sprung up and dropped the bridle and stood! 
and the horse a-going like a house afire too. he just stood up there, 
a-sailing around as easy and comfortable as if he warn't ever drunk in his 
life-and then he begun to pull off his clothes and sling them. he shed 
them so thick they kind of clogged up the air, and altogether he shed 
seventeen suits. and, then, there he was, slim and handsome, and dressed 
the gaudiest and prettiest you ever saw, and he lit into that horse with 
his whip and made him fairly hum-and finally skipped off, and made his 
bow and danced off to the dressing-room, and everybody just a-howling 
with pleasure and astonishment. 
then the ringmaster he see how he had been fooled, and he was the sickest 
ringmaster you ever see, i reckon. why, it was one of his own men! he 
had got up that joke all out of his own head, and never let on to nobody. 
well, i felt sheepish enough to be took in so, but i wouldn't a been in 
that ringmaster's place, not for a thousand dollars. i don't know; there 
may be bullier circuses than what that one was, but i never struck them 
yet. anyways, it was plenty good enough for me; and wherever i run across 
it, it can have all of my custom every time. 
well, that night we had our show; but there warn't only about twelve 
people there-just enough to pay expenses. and they laughed all the 
time, and that made the duke mad; and everybody left, anyway, before the 
show was over, but one boy which was asleep. so the duke said these 
arkansaw lunkheads couldn't come up to shakespeare; what they wanted was 
low comedy-and maybe something ruther worse than low comedy, he 
reckoned. he said he could size their style. so next morning he got 
some big sheets of wrapping paper and some black paint, and drawed off 
some handbills, and stuck them up all over the village. the bills said: 
at the court house! for 3 nights only! 
the world-renowned tragedians 
david garrick the younger! 
and edmund kean the elder! 
of the london and 
continental theatres, 
in their thrilling tragedy of 
the king's cameleopard, 
or the royal nonesuch ! ! ! 
admission 50 cents. 
then at the bottom was the biggest line of all, which said: 
ladies and children not admitted. 
"there," says he, "if that line don't fetch them, i don't know arkansaw!" 
chapter xxiii. 
well, all day him and the king was hard at it, rigging up a stage and a 
curtain and a row of candles for footlights; and that night the house was 
jam full of men in no time. when the place couldn't hold no more, the 
duke he quit tending door and went around the back way and come on to the 
stage and stood up before the curtain and made a little speech, and 
praised up this tragedy, and said it was the most thrillingest one that 
ever was; and so he went on a-bragging about the tragedy, and about 
edmund kean the elder, which was to play the main principal part in it; 
and at last when he'd got everybody's expectations up high enough, he 
rolled up the curtain, and the next minute the king come a-prancing out 
on all fours, naked; and he was painted all over, ring-streaked-and- 
striped, all sorts of colors, as splendid as a rainbow. and-but never 
mind the rest of his outfit; it was just wild, but it was awful funny. 
the people most killed themselves laughing; and when the king got done 
capering and capered off behind the scenes, they roared and clapped and 
stormed and haw-hawed till he come back and done it over again, and after 
that they made him do it another time. well, it would make a cow laugh to 
see the shines that old idiot cut. 
then the duke he lets the curtain down, and bows to the people, and says 
the great tragedy will be performed only two nights more, on accounts of 
pressing london engagements, where the seats is all sold already for it 
in drury lane; and then he makes them another bow, and says if he has 
succeeded in pleasing them and instructing them, he will be deeply 
obleeged if they will mention it to their friends and get them to come 
and see it. 
twenty people sings out: 
"what, is it over? is that all?" 
the duke says yes. then there was a fine time. everybody sings out, 
"sold!" and rose up mad, and was a-going for that stage and them 
tragedians. but a big, fine looking man jumps up on a bench and shouts: 
"hold on! just a word, gentlemen." they stopped to listen. "we are 
sold-mighty badly sold. but we don't want to be the laughing stock of 
this whole town, i reckon, and never hear the last of this thing as long 
as we live. no. what we want is to go out of here quiet, and talk this 
show up, and sell the rest of the town! then we'll all be in the same 
boat. ain't that sensible?" ("you bet it is!-the jedge is right!" 
everybody sings out.) "all right, then-not a word about any sell. go 
along home, and advise everybody to come and see the tragedy." 
next day you couldn't hear nothing around that town but how splendid that 
show was. house was jammed again that night, and we sold this crowd the 
same way. when me and the king and the duke got home to the raft we all 
had a supper; and by and by, about midnight, they made jim and me back 
her out and float her down the middle of the river, and fetch her in and 
hide her about two mile below town. 
the third night the house was crammed again-and they warn't new-comers 
this time, but people that was at the show the other two nights. i stood 
by the duke at the door, and i see that every man that went in had his 
pockets bulging, or something muffled up under his coat-and i see it 
warn't no perfumery, neither, not by a long sight. i smelt sickly eggs 
by the barrel, and rotten cabbages, and such things; and if i know the 
signs of a dead cat being around, and i bet i do, there was sixty-four of 
them went in. i shoved in there for a minute, but it was too various for 
me; i couldn't stand it. well, when the place couldn't hold no more 
people the duke he give a fellow a quarter and told him to tend door for 
him a minute, and then he started around for the stage door, i after him; 
but the minute we turned the corner and was in the dark he says: 
"walk fast now till you get away from the houses, and then shin for the 
raft like the dickens was after you!" 
i done it, and he done the same. we struck the raft at the same time, 
and in less than two seconds we was gliding down stream, all dark and 
still, and edging towards the middle of the river, nobody saying a word. 
i reckoned the poor king was in for a gaudy time of it with the audience, 
but nothing of the sort; pretty soon he crawls out from under the wigwam, 
and says: 
"well, how'd the old thing pan out this time, duke?" he hadn't been 
up-town at all. 
we never showed a light till we was about ten mile below the village. 
then we lit up and had a supper, and the king and the duke fairly laughed 
their bones loose over the way they'd served them people. the duke says: 
"greenhorns, flatheads! i knew the first house would keep mum and let 
the rest of the town get roped in; and i knew they'd lay for us the third 
night, and consider it was their turn now. well, it is their turn, and 
i'd give something to know how much they'd take for it. i would just 
like to know how they're putting in their opportunity. they can turn it 
into a picnic if they want to-they brought plenty provisions." 
them rapscallions took in four hundred and sixty-five dollars in that 
three nights. i never see money hauled in by the wagon-load like that 
before. by and by, when they was asleep and snoring, jim says: 
"don't it s'prise you de way dem kings carries on, huck?" 
"no," i says, "it don't." 
"why don't it, huck?" 
"well, it don't, because it's in the breed. i reckon they're all alike," 
"but, huck, dese kings o' ourn is reglar rapscallions; dat's jist what 
dey is; dey's reglar rapscallions." 
"well, that's what i'm a-saying; all kings is mostly rapscallions, as fur 
as i can make out." 
"is dat so?" 
"you read about them once-you'll see. look at henry the eight; this 'n 
's a sunday-school superintendent to him. and look at charles second, 
and louis fourteen, and louis fifteen, and james second, and edward 
second, and richard third, and forty more; besides all them saxon 
heptarchies that used to rip around so in old times and raise cain. my, 
you ought to seen old henry the eight when he was in bloom. he was a 
blossom. he used to marry a new wife every day, and chop off her head 
next morning. and he would do it just as indifferent as if he was 
ordering up eggs. 'fetch up nell gwynn,' he says. they fetch her up. 
next morning, 'chop off her head!' and they chop it off. 'fetch up jane 
shore,' he says; and up she comes, next morning, 'chop off her head'-and 
they chop it off. 'ring up fair rosamun.' fair rosamun answers the 
bell. next morning, 'chop off her head.' and he made every one of them 
tell him a tale every night; and he kept that up till he had hogged a 
thousand and one tales that way, and then he put them all in a book, and 
called it domesday book-which was a good name and stated the case. you 
don't know kings, jim, but i know them; and this old rip of ourn is one 
of the cleanest i've struck in history. well, henry he takes a notion he 
wants to get up some trouble with this country. how does he go at it 
give notice?-give the country a show? no. all of a sudden he heaves 
all the tea in boston harbor overboard, and whacks out a declaration of 
independence, and dares them to come on. that was his style-he never 
give anybody a chance. he had suspicions of his father, the duke of 
wellington. well, what did he do? ask him to show up? no-drownded 
him in a butt of mamsey, like a cat. s'pose people left money laying 
around where he was-what did he do? he collared it. s'pose he 
contracted to do a thing, and you paid him, and didn't set down there and 
see that he done it-what did he do? he always done the other thing. 
s'pose he opened his mouth-what then? if he didn't shut it up powerful 
quick he'd lose a lie every time. that's the kind of a bug henry was; 
and if we'd a had him along 'stead of our kings he'd a fooled that town a 
heap worse than ourn done. i don't say that ourn is lambs, because they 
ain't, when you come right down to the cold facts; but they ain't nothing 
to that old ram, anyway. all i say is, kings is kings, and you got to 
make allowances. take them all around, they're a mighty ornery lot. 
it's the way they're raised." 
"but dis one do smell so like de nation, huck." 
"well, they all do, jim. we can't help the way a king smells; history 
don't tell no way." 
"now de duke, he's a tolerble likely man in some ways." 
"yes, a duke's different. but not very different. this one's a middling 
hard lot for a duke. when he's drunk there ain't no near-sighted man 
could tell him from a king." 
"well, anyways, i doan' hanker for no mo' un um, huck. dese is all i kin 
stan'." 
"it's the way i feel, too, jim. but we've got them on our hands, and we 
got to remember what they are, and make allowances. sometimes i wish we 
could hear of a country that's out of kings." 
what was the use to tell jim these warn't real kings and dukes? it 
wouldn't a done no good; and, besides, it was just as i said: you 
couldn't tell them from the real kind. 
i went to sleep, and jim didn't call me when it was my turn. he often 
done that. when i waked up just at daybreak he was sitting there with 
his head down betwixt his knees, moaning and mourning to himself. i 
didn't take notice nor let on. i knowed what it was about. he was 
thinking about his wife and his children, away up yonder, and he was low 
and homesick; because he hadn't ever been away from home before in his 
life; and i do believe he cared just as much for his people as white 
folks does for their'n. it don't seem natural, but i reckon it's so. he 
was often moaning and mourning that way nights, when he judged i was 
asleep, and saying, "po' little 'lizabeth! po' little johnny! it's mighty 
hard; i spec' i ain't ever gwyne to see you no mo', no mo'!" he was a 
mighty good nigger, jim was. 
but this time i somehow got to talking to him about his wife and young 
ones; and by and by he says: 
"what makes me feel so bad dis time 'uz bekase i hear sumpn over yonder 
on de bank like a whack, er a slam, while ago, en it mine me er de time i 
treat my little 'lizabeth so ornery. she warn't on'y 'bout fo' year ole, 
en she tuck de sk'yarlet fever, en had a powful rough spell; but she got 
well, en one day she was a-stannin' aroun', en i says to her, i says: 
"'shet de do'.' 
"she never done it; jis' stood dah, kiner smilin' up at me. it make me 
mad; en i says agin, mighty loud, i says: 
"'doan' you hear me? shet de do'!' 
"she jis stood de same way, kiner smilin' up. i was a-bilin'! i says: 
"'i lay i make you mine!' 
"en wid dat i fetch' her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin'. 
den i went into de yuther room, en 'uz gone 'bout ten minutes; en when i 
come back dah was dat do' a-stannin' open yit, en dat chile stannin' mos' 
right in it, a-lookin' down and mournin', en de tears runnin' down. my, 
but i wuz mad! i was a-gwyne for de chile, but jis' den-it was a do' 
dat open innerds-jis' den, 'long come de wind en slam it to, behine de 
chile, ker-blam!-en my lan', de chile never move'! my breff mos' hop 
outer me; en i feel so-so-i doan' know how i feel. i crope out, all 
a-tremblin', en crope aroun' en open de do' easy en slow, en poke my head 
in behine de chile, sof' en still, en all uv a sudden i says pow! jis' as 
loud as i could yell. she never budge! oh, huck, i bust out a-cryin' en 
grab her up in my arms, en say, 'oh, de po' little thing! de lord god 
amighty fogive po' ole jim, kaze he never gwyne to fogive hisself as 
long's he live!' oh, she was plumb deef en dumb, huck, plumb deef en 
dumb-en i'd ben a-treat'n her so!" 
chapter xxiv. 
next day, towards night, we laid up under a little willow towhead out in 
the middle, where there was a village on each side of the river, and the 
duke and the king begun to lay out a plan for working them towns. jim he 
spoke to the duke, and said he hoped it wouldn't take but a few hours, 
because it got mighty heavy and tiresome to him when he had to lay all 
day in the wigwam tied with the rope. you see, when we left him all 
alone we had to tie him, because if anybody happened on to him all by 
himself and not tied it wouldn't look much like he was a runaway nigger, 
you know. so the duke said it was kind of hard to have to lay roped all 
day, and he'd cipher out some way to get around it. 
he was uncommon bright, the duke was, and he soon struck it. he dressed 
jim up in king lear's outfit-it was a long curtain-calico gown, and a 
white horse-hair wig and whiskers; and then he took his theater paint and 
painted jim's face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead, dull, 
solid blue, like a man that's been drownded nine days. blamed if he 
warn't the horriblest looking outrage i ever see. then the duke took and 
wrote out a sign on a shingle so: 
sick arab-but harmless when not out of his head. 
and he nailed that shingle to a lath, and stood the lath up four or five 
foot in front of the wigwam. jim was satisfied. he said it was a sight 
better than lying tied a couple of years every day, and trembling all 
over every time there was a sound. the duke told him to make himself 
free and easy, and if anybody ever come meddling around, he must hop out 
of the wigwam, and carry on a little, and fetch a howl or two like a wild 
beast, and he reckoned they would light out and leave him alone. which 
was sound enough judgment; but you take the average man, and he wouldn't 
wait for him to howl. why, he didn't only look like he was dead, he 
looked considerable more than that. 
these rapscallions wanted to try the nonesuch again, because there was so 
much money in it, but they judged it wouldn't be safe, because maybe the 
news might a worked along down by this time. they couldn't hit no 
project that suited exactly; so at last the duke said he reckoned he'd 
lay off and work his brains an hour or two and see if he couldn't put up 
something on the arkansaw village; and the king he allowed he would drop 
over to t'other village without any plan, but just trust in providence to 
lead him the profitable way-meaning the devil, i reckon. we had all 
bought store clothes where we stopped last; and now the king put his'n 
on, and he told me to put mine on. i done it, of course. the king's 
duds was all black, and he did look real swell and starchy. i never 
knowed how clothes could change a body before. why, before, he looked 
like the orneriest old rip that ever was; but now, when he'd take off his 
new white beaver and make a bow and do a smile, he looked that grand and 
good and pious that you'd say he had walked right out of the ark, and 
maybe was old leviticus himself. jim cleaned up the canoe, and i got my 
paddle ready. there was a big steamboat laying at the shore away up 
under the point, about three mile above the town-been there a couple 
of hours, taking on freight. says the king: 
"seein' how i'm dressed, i reckon maybe i better arrive down from st. 
louis or cincinnati, or some other big place. go for the steamboat, 
huckleberry; we'll come down to the village on her." 
i didn't have to be ordered twice to go and take a steamboat ride. i 
fetched the shore a half a mile above the village, and then went scooting 
along the bluff bank in the easy water. pretty soon we come to a nice 
innocent-looking young country jake setting on a log swabbing the sweat 
off of his face, for it was powerful warm weather; and he had a couple of 
big carpet-bags by him. 
"run her nose in shore," says the king. i done it. "wher' you bound 
for, young man?" 
"for the steamboat; going to orleans." 
"git aboard," says the king. "hold on a minute, my servant 'll he'p you 
with them bags. jump out and he'p the gentleman, adolphus"-meaning me, 
i see. 
i done so, and then we all three started on again. the young chap was 
mighty thankful; said it was tough work toting his baggage such weather. 
he asked the king where he was going, and the king told him he'd come 
down the river and landed at the other village this morning, and now he 
was going up a few mile to see an old friend on a farm up there. the 
young fellow says: 
"when i first see you i says to myself, 'it's mr. wilks, sure, and he 
come mighty near getting here in time.' but then i says again, 'no, i 
reckon it ain't him, or else he wouldn't be paddling up the river.' you 
ain't him, are you?" 
"no, my name's blodgett-elexander blodgett-reverend elexander blodgett, 
i s'pose i must say, as i'm one o' the lord's poor servants. but still 
i'm jist as able to be sorry for mr. wilks for not arriving in time, all 
the same, if he's missed anything by it-which i hope he hasn't." 
"well, he don't miss any property by it, because he'll get that all 
right; but he's missed seeing his brother peter die-which he mayn't 
mind, nobody can tell as to that-but his brother would a give anything 
in this world to see him before he died; never talked about nothing else 
all these three weeks; hadn't seen him since they was boys together-and 
hadn't ever seen his brother william at all-that's the deef and dumb 
one-william ain't more than thirty or thirty-five. peter and george 
were the only ones that come out here; george was the married brother; 
him and his wife both died last year. harvey and william's the only ones 
that's left now; and, as i was saying, they haven't got here in time." 
"did anybody send 'em word?" 
"oh, yes; a month or two ago, when peter was first took; because peter 
said then that he sorter felt like he warn't going to get well this time. 
you see, he was pretty old, and george's g'yirls was too young to be much 
company for him, except mary jane, the red-headed one; and so he was 
kinder lonesome after george and his wife died, and didn't seem to care 
much to live. he most desperately wanted to see harvey-and william, 
too, for that matter-because he was one of them kind that can't bear to 
make a will. he left a letter behind for harvey, and said he'd told in 
it where his money was hid, and how he wanted the rest of the property 
divided up so george's g'yirls would be all right-for george didn't 
leave nothing. and that letter was all they could get him to put a pen 
to." 
"why do you reckon harvey don't come? wher' does he live?" 
"oh, he lives in england-sheffield-preaches there-hasn't ever been in 
this country. he hasn't had any too much time-and besides he mightn't a 
got the letter at all, you know." 
"too bad, too bad he couldn't a lived to see his brothers, poor soul. 
you going to orleans, you say?" 
"yes, but that ain't only a part of it. i'm going in a ship, next 
wednesday, for ryo janeero, where my uncle lives." 
"it's a pretty long journey. but it'll be lovely; wisht i was a-going. 
is mary jane the oldest? how old is the others?" 
"mary jane's nineteen, susan's fifteen, and joanna's about fourteen 
that's the one that gives herself to good works and has a hare-lip." 
"poor things! to be left alone in the cold world so." 
"well, they could be worse off. old peter had friends, and they ain't 
going to let them come to no harm. there's hobson, the babtis' preacher; 
and deacon lot hovey, and ben rucker, and abner shackleford, and levi 
bell, the lawyer; and dr. robinson, and their wives, and the widow 
bartley, and-well, there's a lot of them; but these are the ones that 
peter was thickest with, and used to write about sometimes, when he wrote 
home; so harvey 'll know where to look for friends when he gets here." 
well, the old man went on asking questions till he just fairly emptied 
that young fellow. blamed if he didn't inquire about everybody and 
everything in that blessed town, and all about the wilkses; and about 
peter's business-which was a tanner; and about george's-which was a 
carpenter; and about harvey's-which was a dissentering minister; and so 
on, and so on. then he says: 
"what did you want to walk all the way up to the steamboat for?" 
"because she's a big orleans boat, and i was afeard she mightn't stop 
there. when they're deep they won't stop for a hail. a cincinnati boat 
will, but this is a st. louis one." 
"was peter wilks well off?" 
"oh, yes, pretty well off. he had houses and land, and it's reckoned he 
left three or four thousand in cash hid up som'ers." 
"when did you say he died?" 
"i didn't say, but it was last night." 
"funeral to-morrow, likely?" 
"yes, 'bout the middle of the day." 
"well, it's all terrible sad; but we've all got to go, one time or 
another. so what we want to do is to be prepared; then we're all right." 
"yes, sir, it's the best way. ma used to always say that." 
when we struck the boat she was about done loading, and pretty soon she 
got off. the king never said nothing about going aboard, so i lost my 
ride, after all. when the boat was gone the king made me paddle up 
another mile to a lonesome place, and then he got ashore and says: 
"now hustle back, right off, and fetch the duke up here, and the new 
carpet-bags. and if he's gone over to t'other side, go over there and 
git him. and tell him to git himself up regardless. shove along, now." 
i see what he was up to; but i never said nothing, of course. when i got 
back with the duke we hid the canoe, and then they set down on a log, and 
the king told him everything, just like the young fellow had said it 
every last word of it. and all the time he was a-doing it he tried to 
talk like an englishman; and he done it pretty well, too, for a slouch. 
i can't imitate him, and so i ain't a-going to try to; but he really done 
it pretty good. then he says: 
"how are you on the deef and dumb, bilgewater?" 
the duke said, leave him alone for that; said he had played a deef and 
dumb person on the histronic boards. so then they waited for a 
steamboat. 
about the middle of the afternoon a couple of little boats come along, 
but they didn't come from high enough up the river; but at last there was 
a big one, and they hailed her. she sent out her yawl, and we went 
aboard, and she was from cincinnati; and when they found we only wanted 
to go four or five mile they was booming mad, and gave us a cussing, and 
said they wouldn't land us. but the king was ca'm. he says: 
"if gentlemen kin afford to pay a dollar a mile apiece to be took on and 
put off in a yawl, a steamboat kin afford to carry 'em, can't it?" 
so they softened down and said it was all right; and when we got to the 
village they yawled us ashore. about two dozen men flocked down when 
they see the yawl a-coming, and when the king says: 
"kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher' mr. peter wilks lives?" they give 
a glance at one another, and nodded their heads, as much as to say, "what 
d' i tell you?" then one of them says, kind of soft and gentle: 
"i'm sorry sir, but the best we can do is to tell you where he did live 
yesterday evening." 
sudden as winking the ornery old cretur went an to smash, and fell up 
against the man, and put his chin on his shoulder, and cried down his 
back, and says: 
"alas, alas, our poor brother-gone, and we never got to see him; oh, 
it's too, too hard!" 
then he turns around, blubbering, and makes a lot of idiotic signs to the 
duke on his hands, and blamed if he didn't drop a carpet-bag and bust out 
a-crying. if they warn't the beatenest lot, them two frauds, that ever i 
struck. 
well, the men gathered around and sympathized with them, and said all 
sorts of kind things to them, and carried their carpet-bags up the hill 
for them, and let them lean on them and cry, and told the king all about 
his brother's last moments, and the king he told it all over again on his 
hands to the duke, and both of them took on about that dead tanner like 
they'd lost the twelve disciples. well, if ever i struck anything like 
it, i'm a nigger. it was enough to make a body ashamed of the human race. 
chapter xxv. 
the news was all over town in two minutes, and you could see the people 
tearing down on the run from every which way, some of them putting on 
their coats as they come. pretty soon we was in the middle of a crowd, 
and the noise of the tramping was like a soldier march. the windows and 
dooryards was full; and every minute somebody would say, over a fence: 
"is it them?" 
and somebody trotting along with the gang would answer back and say: 
"you bet it is." 
when we got to the house the street in front of it was packed, and the 
three girls was standing in the door. mary jane was red-headed, but that 
don't make no difference, she was most awful beautiful, and her face and 
her eyes was all lit up like glory, she was so glad her uncles was come. 
the king he spread his arms, and mary jane she jumped for them, and the 
hare-lip jumped for the duke, and there they had it! everybody most, 
leastways women, cried for joy to see them meet again at last and have 
such good times. 
then the king he hunched the duke private-i see him do it-and then he 
looked around and see the coffin, over in the corner on two chairs; so 
then him and the duke, with a hand across each other's shoulder, and 
t'other hand to their eyes, walked slow and solemn over there, everybody 
dropping back to give them room, and all the talk and noise stopping, 
people saying "sh!" and all the men taking their hats off and drooping 
their heads, so you could a heard a pin fall. and when they got there 
they bent over and looked in the coffin, and took one sight, and then 
they bust out a-crying so you could a heard them to orleans, most; and 
then they put their arms around each other's necks, and hung their chins 
over each other's shoulders; and then for three minutes, or maybe four, i 
never see two men leak the way they done. and, mind you, everybody was 
doing the same; and the place was that damp i never see anything like it. 
then one of them got on one side of the coffin, and t'other on t'other 
side, and they kneeled down and rested their foreheads on the coffin, and 
let on to pray all to themselves. well, when it come to that it worked 
the crowd like you never see anything like it, and everybody broke down 
and went to sobbing right out loud-the poor girls, too; and every woman, 
nearly, went up to the girls, without saying a word, and kissed them, 
solemn, on the forehead, and then put their hand on their head, and 
looked up towards the sky, with the tears running down, and then busted 
out and went off sobbing and swabbing, and give the next woman a show. i 
never see anything so disgusting. 
well, by and by the king he gets up and comes forward a little, and works 
himself up and slobbers out a speech, all full of tears and flapdoodle 
about its being a sore trial for him and his poor brother to lose the 
diseased, and to miss seeing diseased alive after the long journey of 
four thousand mile, but it's a trial that's sweetened and sanctified to 
us by this dear sympathy and these holy tears, and so he thanks them out 
of his heart and out of his brother's heart, because out of their mouths 
they can't, words being too weak and cold, and all that kind of rot and 
slush, till it was just sickening; and then he blubbers out a pious 
goody-goody amen, and turns himself loose and goes to crying fit to bust. 
and the minute the words were out of his mouth somebody over in the crowd 
struck up the doxolojer, and everybody joined in with all their might, 
and it just warmed you up and made you feel as good as church letting 
out. music is a good thing; and after all that soul-butter and hogwash i 
never see it freshen up things so, and sound so honest and bully. 
then the king begins to work his jaw again, and says how him and his 
nieces would be glad if a few of the main principal friends of the family 
would take supper here with them this evening, and help set up with the 
ashes of the diseased; and says if his poor brother laying yonder could 
speak he knows who he would name, for they was names that was very dear 
to him, and mentioned often in his letters; and so he will name the same, 
to wit, as follows, vizz.:-rev. mr. hobson, and deacon lot hovey, and 
mr. ben rucker, and abner shackleford, and levi bell, and dr. robinson, 
and their wives, and the widow bartley. 
rev. hobson and dr. robinson was down to the end of the town a-hunting 
together-that is, i mean the doctor was shipping a sick man to t'other 
world, and the preacher was pinting him right. lawyer bell was away up 
to louisville on business. but the rest was on hand, and so they all 
come and shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him; and 
then they shook hands with the duke and didn't say nothing, but just kept 
a-smiling and bobbing their heads like a passel of sapheads whilst he 
made all sorts of signs with his hands and said "goo-goo-goo-goo-goo" 
all the time, like a baby that can't talk. 
so the king he blattered along, and managed to inquire about pretty much 
everybody and dog in town, by his name, and mentioned all sorts of little 
things that happened one time or another in the town, or to george's 
family, or to peter. and he always let on that peter wrote him the 
things; but that was a lie: he got every blessed one of them out of that 
young flathead that we canoed up to the steamboat. 
then mary jane she fetched the letter her father left behind, and the 
king he read it out loud and cried over it. it give the dwelling-house 
and three thousand dollars, gold, to the girls; and it give the tanyard 
(which was doing a good business), along with some other houses and land 
(worth about seven thousand), and three thousand dollars in gold to 
harvey and william, and told where the six thousand cash was hid down 
cellar. so these two frauds said they'd go and fetch it up, and have 
everything square and above-board; and told me to come with a candle. we 
shut the cellar door behind us, and when they found the bag they spilt it 
out on the floor, and it was a lovely sight, all them yaller-boys. my, 
the way the king's eyes did shine! he slaps the duke on the shoulder and 
says: 
"oh, this ain't bully nor noth'n! oh, no, i reckon not! why, billy, it 
beats the nonesuch, don't it?" 
the duke allowed it did. they pawed the yaller-boys, and sifted them 
through their fingers and let them jingle down on the floor; and the king 
says: 
"it ain't no use talkin'; bein' brothers to a rich dead man and 
representatives of furrin heirs that's got left is the line for you and 
me, bilge. thish yer comes of trust'n to providence. it's the best way, 
in the long run. i've tried 'em all, and ther' ain't no better way." 
most everybody would a been satisfied with the pile, and took it on 
trust; but no, they must count it. so they counts it, and it comes out 
four hundred and fifteen dollars short. says the king: 
"dern him, i wonder what he done with that four hundred and fifteen 
dollars?" 
they worried over that awhile, and ransacked all around for it. then the 
duke says: 
"well, he was a pretty sick man, and likely he made a mistake-i reckon 
that's the way of it. the best way's to let it go, and keep still about 
it. we can spare it." 
"oh, shucks, yes, we can spare it. i don't k'yer noth'n 'bout that-it's 
the count i'm thinkin' about. we want to be awful square and open and 
above-board here, you know. we want to lug this h-yer money up stairs 
and count it before everybody-then ther' ain't noth'n suspicious. but 
when the dead man says ther's six thous'n dollars, you know, we don't 
want to-" 
"hold on," says the duke. "le's make up the deffisit," and he begun to 
haul out yaller-boys out of his pocket. 
"it's a most amaz'n' good idea, duke-you have got a rattlin' clever head 
on you," says the king. "blest if the old nonesuch ain't a heppin' us 
out agin," and he begun to haul out yaller-jackets and stack them up. 
it most busted them, but they made up the six thousand clean and clear. 
"say," says the duke, "i got another idea. le's go up stairs and count 
this money, and then take and give it to the girls." 
"good land, duke, lemme hug you! it's the most dazzling idea 'at ever a 
man struck. you have cert'nly got the most astonishin' head i ever see. 
oh, this is the boss dodge, ther' ain't no mistake 'bout it. let 'em 
fetch along their suspicions now if they want to-this 'll lay 'em out." 
when we got up-stairs everybody gethered around the table, and the king 
he counted it and stacked it up, three hundred dollars in a pile-twenty 
elegant little piles. everybody looked hungry at it, and licked their 
chops. then they raked it into the bag again, and i see the king begin 
to swell himself up for another speech. he says: 
"friends all, my poor brother that lays yonder has done generous by them 
that's left behind in the vale of sorrers. he has done generous by these 
yer poor little lambs that he loved and sheltered, and that's left 
fatherless and motherless. yes, and we that knowed him knows that he 
would a done more generous by 'em if he hadn't ben afeard o' woundin' his 
dear william and me. now, wouldn't he? ther' ain't no question 'bout it 
in my mind. well, then, what kind o' brothers would it be that 'd stand 
in his way at sech a time? and what kind o' uncles would it be that 'd 
rob-yes, rob-sech poor sweet lambs as these 'at he loved so at sech a 
time? if i know william-and i think i do-he-well, i'll jest ask him." 
he turns around and begins to make a lot of signs to the duke with his 
hands, and the duke he looks at him stupid and leather-headed a while; 
then all of a sudden he seems to catch his meaning, and jumps for the 
king, goo-gooing with all his might for joy, and hugs him about fifteen 
times before he lets up. then the king says, "i knowed it; i reckon that 
'll convince anybody the way he feels about it. here, mary jane, susan, 
joanner, take the money-take it all. it's the gift of him that lays 
yonder, cold but joyful." 
mary jane she went for him, susan and the hare-lip went for the duke, and 
then such another hugging and kissing i never see yet. and everybody 
crowded up with the tears in their eyes, and most shook the hands off of 
them frauds, saying all the time: 
"you dear good souls!-how lovely!-how could you!" 
well, then, pretty soon all hands got to talking about the diseased 
again, and how good he was, and what a loss he was, and all that; and 
before long a big iron-jawed man worked himself in there from outside, 
and stood a-listening and looking, and not saying anything; and nobody 
saying anything to him either, because the king was talking and they was 
all busy listening. the king was saying-in the middle of something he'd 
started in on- 
"-they bein' partickler friends o' the diseased. that's why they're 
invited here this evenin'; but tomorrow we want all to come-everybody; 
for he respected everybody, he liked everybody, and so it's fitten that 
his funeral orgies sh'd be public." 
and so he went a-mooning on and on, liking to hear himself talk, and 
every little while he fetched in his funeral orgies again, till the duke 
he couldn't stand it no more; so he writes on a little scrap of paper, 
"obsequies, you old fool," and folds it up, and goes to goo-gooing and 
reaching it over people's heads to him. the king he reads it and puts it 
in his pocket, and says: 
"poor william, afflicted as he is, his heart's aluz right. asks me to 
invite everybody to come to the funeral-wants me to make 'em all 
welcome. but he needn't a worried-it was jest what i was at." 
then he weaves along again, perfectly ca'm, and goes to dropping in his 
funeral orgies again every now and then, just like he done before. and 
when he done it the third time he says: 
"i say orgies, not because it's the common term, because it ain't 
obsequies bein' the common term-but because orgies is the right term. 
obsequies ain't used in england no more now-it's gone out. we say 
orgies now in england. orgies is better, because it means the thing 
you're after more exact. it's a word that's made up out'n the greek 
orgo, outside, open, abroad; and the hebrew jeesum, to plant, cover up; 
hence inter. so, you see, funeral orgies is an open er public funeral." 
he was the worst i ever struck. well, the iron-jawed man he laughed 
right in his face. everybody was shocked. everybody says, "why, 
doctor!" and abner shackleford says: 
"why, robinson, hain't you heard the news? this is harvey wilks." 
the king he smiled eager, and shoved out his flapper, and says: 
"is it my poor brother's dear good friend and physician? i-" 
"keep your hands off of me!" says the doctor. "you talk like an 
englishman, don't you? it's the worst imitation i ever heard. you peter 
wilks's brother! you're a fraud, that's what you are!" 
well, how they all took on! they crowded around the doctor and tried to 
quiet him down, and tried to explain to him and tell him how harvey 'd 
showed in forty ways that he was harvey, and knowed everybody by name, 
and the names of the very dogs, and begged and begged him not to hurt 
harvey's feelings and the poor girl's feelings, and all that. but it 
warn't no use; he stormed right along, and said any man that pretended to 
be an englishman and couldn't imitate the lingo no better than what he 
did was a fraud and a liar. the poor girls was hanging to the king and 
crying; and all of a sudden the doctor ups and turns on them. he says: 
"i was your father's friend, and i'm your friend; and i warn you as a 
friend, and an honest one that wants to protect you and keep you out of 
harm and trouble, to turn your backs on that scoundrel and have nothing 
to do with him, the ignorant tramp, with his idiotic greek and hebrew, as 
he calls it. he is the thinnest kind of an impostor-has come here with 
a lot of empty names and facts which he picked up somewheres, and you 
take them for proofs, and are helped to fool yourselves by these foolish 
friends here, who ought to know better. mary jane wilks, you know me for 
your friend, and for your unselfish friend, too. now listen to me; turn 
this pitiful rascal out-i beg you to do it. will you?" 
mary jane straightened herself up, and my, but she was handsome! she 
says: 
"here is my answer." she hove up the bag of money and put it in the 
king's hands, and says, "take this six thousand dollars, and invest for 
me and my sisters any way you want to, and don't give us no receipt for 
it." 
then she put her arm around the king on one side, and susan and the 
hare-lip done the same on the other. everybody clapped their hands and 
stomped on the floor like a perfect storm, whilst the king held up his 
head and smiled proud. the doctor says: 
"all right; i wash my hands of the matter. but i warn you all that a 
time 's coming when you're going to feel sick whenever you think of this 
day." and away he went. 
"all right, doctor," says the king, kinder mocking him; "we'll try and 
get 'em to send for you;" which made them all laugh, and they said it was 
a prime good hit. 
chapter xxvi. 
well, when they was all gone the king he asks mary jane how they was off 
for spare rooms, and she said she had one spare room, which would do for 
uncle william, and she'd give her own room to uncle harvey, which was a 
little bigger, and she would turn into the room with her sisters and 
sleep on a cot; and up garret was a little cubby, with a pallet in it. 
the king said the cubby would do for his valley-meaning me. 
so mary jane took us up, and she showed them their rooms, which was plain 
but nice. she said she'd have her frocks and a lot of other traps took 
out of her room if they was in uncle harvey's way, but he said they 
warn't. the frocks was hung along the wall, and before them was a 
curtain made out of calico that hung down to the floor. there was an old 
hair trunk in one corner, and a guitar-box in another, and all sorts of 
little knickknacks and jimcracks around, like girls brisken up a room 
with. the king said it was all the more homely and more pleasanter for 
these fixings, and so don't disturb them. the duke's room was pretty 
small, but plenty good enough, and so was my cubby. 
that night they had a big supper, and all them men and women was there, 
and i stood behind the king and the duke's chairs and waited on them, and 
the niggers waited on the rest. mary jane she set at the head of the 
table, with susan alongside of her, and said how bad the biscuits was, 
and how mean the preserves was, and how ornery and tough the fried 
chickens was-and all that kind of rot, the way women always do for to 
force out compliments; and the people all knowed everything was tiptop, 
and said so-said "how do you get biscuits to brown so nice?" and "where, 
for the land's sake, did you get these amaz'n pickles?" and all that kind 
of humbug talky-talk, just the way people always does at a supper, you 
know. 
and when it was all done me and the hare-lip had supper in the kitchen 
off of the leavings, whilst the others was helping the niggers clean up 
the things. the hare-lip she got to pumping me about england, and blest 
if i didn't think the ice was getting mighty thin sometimes. she says: 
"did you ever see the king?" 
"who? william fourth? well, i bet i have-he goes to our church." i 
knowed he was dead years ago, but i never let on. so when i says he goes 
to our church, she says: 
"what-regular?" 
"yes-regular. his pew's right over opposite ourn-on t'other side the 
pulpit." 
"i thought he lived in london?" 
"well, he does. where would he live?" 
"but i thought you lived in sheffield?" 
i see i was up a stump. i had to let on to get choked with a chicken 
bone, so as to get time to think how to get down again. then i says: 
"i mean he goes to our church regular when he's in sheffield. that's 
only in the summer time, when he comes there to take the sea baths." 
"why, how you talk-sheffield ain't on the sea." 
"well, who said it was?" 
"why, you did." 
"i didn't nuther." 
"you did!" 
"i didn't." 
"you did." 
"i never said nothing of the kind." 
"well, what did you say, then?" 
"said he come to take the sea baths-that's what i said." 
"well, then, how's he going to take the sea baths if it ain't on the 
sea?" 
"looky here," i says; "did you ever see any congress-water?" 
"yes." 
"well, did you have to go to congress to get it?" 
"why, no." 
"well, neither does william fourth have to go to the sea to get a sea 
bath." 
"how does he get it, then?" 
"gets it the way people down here gets congress-water-in barrels. there 
in the palace at sheffield they've got furnaces, and he wants his water 
hot. they can't bile that amount of water away off there at the sea. 
they haven't got no conveniences for it." 
"oh, i see, now. you might a said that in the first place and saved 
time." 
when she said that i see i was out of the woods again, and so i was 
comfortable and glad. next, she says: 
"do you go to church, too?" 
"yes-regular." 
"where do you set?" 
"why, in our pew." 
"whose pew?" 
"why, ourn-your uncle harvey's." 
"his'n? what does he want with a pew?" 
"wants it to set in. what did you reckon he wanted with it?" 
"why, i thought he'd be in the pulpit." 
rot him, i forgot he was a preacher. i see i was up a stump again, so i 
played another chicken bone and got another think. then i says: 
"blame it, do you suppose there ain't but one preacher to a church?" 
"why, what do they want with more?" 
"what!-to preach before a king? i never did see such a girl as you. 
they don't have no less than seventeen." 
"seventeen! my land! why, i wouldn't set out such a string as that, not 
if i never got to glory. it must take 'em a week." 
"shucks, they don't all of 'em preach the same day-only one of 'em." 
"well, then, what does the rest of 'em do?" 
"oh, nothing much. loll around, pass the plate-and one thing or 
another. but mainly they don't do nothing." 
"well, then, what are they for?" 
"why, they're for style. don't you know nothing?" 
"well, i don't want to know no such foolishness as that. how is servants 
treated in england? do they treat 'em better 'n we treat our niggers?" 
"no! a servant ain't nobody there. they treat them worse than dogs." 
"don't they give 'em holidays, the way we do, christmas and new year's 
week, and fourth of july?" 
"oh, just listen! a body could tell you hain't ever been to england by 
that. why, hare-l-why, joanna, they never see a holiday from year's end 
to year's end; never go to the circus, nor theater, nor nigger shows, nor 
nowheres." 
"nor church?" 
"nor church." 
"but you always went to church." 
well, i was gone up again. i forgot i was the old man's servant. but 
next minute i whirled in on a kind of an explanation how a valley was 
different from a common servant and had to go to church whether he wanted 
to or not, and set with the family, on account of its being the law. but 
i didn't do it pretty good, and when i got done i see she warn't 
satisfied. she says: 
"honest injun, now, hain't you been telling me a lot of lies?" 
"honest injun," says i. 
"none of it at all?" 
"none of it at all. not a lie in it," says i. 
"lay your hand on this book and say it." 
i see it warn't nothing but a dictionary, so i laid my hand on it and 
said it. so then she looked a little better satisfied, and says: 
"well, then, i'll believe some of it; but i hope to gracious if i'll 
believe the rest." 
"what is it you won't believe, joe?" says mary jane, stepping in with 
susan behind her. "it ain't right nor kind for you to talk so to him, 
and him a stranger and so far from his people. how would you like to be 
treated so?" 
"that's always your way, maim-always sailing in to help somebody before 
they're hurt. i hain't done nothing to him. he's told some stretchers, 
i reckon, and i said i wouldn't swallow it all; and that's every bit and 
grain i did say. i reckon he can stand a little thing like that, can't 
he?" 
"i don't care whether 'twas little or whether 'twas big; he's here in our 
house and a stranger, and it wasn't good of you to say it. if you was in 
his place it would make you feel ashamed; and so you oughtn't to say a 
thing to another person that will make them feel ashamed." 
"why, maim, he said-" 
"it don't make no difference what he said-that ain't the thing. the 
thing is for you to treat him kind, and not be saying things to make him 
remember he ain't in his own country and amongst his own folks." 
i says to myself, this is a girl that i'm letting that old reptle rob her 
of her money! 
then susan she waltzed in; and if you'll believe me, she did give 
hare-lip hark from the tomb! 
says i to myself, and this is another one that i'm letting him rob her of 
her money! 
then mary jane she took another inning, and went in sweet and lovely 
again-which was her way; but when she got done there warn't hardly 
anything left o' poor hare-lip. so she hollered. 
"all right, then," says the other girls; "you just ask his pardon." 
she done it, too; and she done it beautiful. she done it so beautiful it 
was good to hear; and i wished i could tell her a thousand lies, so she 
could do it again. 
i says to myself, this is another one that i'm letting him rob her of her 
money. and when she got through they all jest laid theirselves out to 
make me feel at home and know i was amongst friends. i felt so ornery 
and low down and mean that i says to myself, my mind's made up; i'll hive 
that money for them or bust. 
so then i lit out-for bed, i said, meaning some time or another. when i 
got by myself i went to thinking the thing over. i says to myself, shall 
i go to that doctor, private, and blow on these frauds? no-that won't 
do. he might tell who told him; then the king and the duke would make it 
warm for me. shall i go, private, and tell mary jane? no-i dasn't do 
it. her face would give them a hint, sure; they've got the money, and 
they'd slide right out and get away with it. if she was to fetch in help 
i'd get mixed up in the business before it was done with, i judge. no; 
there ain't no good way but one. i got to steal that money, somehow; and 
i got to steal it some way that they won't suspicion that i done it. 
they've got a good thing here, and they ain't a-going to leave till 
they've played this family and this town for all they're worth, so i'll 
find a chance time enough. i'll steal it and hide it; and by and by, when 
i'm away down the river, i'll write a letter and tell mary jane where 
it's hid. but i better hive it tonight if i can, because the doctor 
maybe hasn't let up as much as he lets on he has; he might scare them out 
of here yet. 
so, thinks i, i'll go and search them rooms. upstairs the hall was dark, 
but i found the duke's room, and started to paw around it with my hands; 
but i recollected it wouldn't be much like the king to let anybody else 
take care of that money but his own self; so then i went to his room and 
begun to paw around there. but i see i couldn't do nothing without a 
candle, and i dasn't light one, of course. so i judged i'd got to do the 
other thing-lay for them and eavesdrop. about that time i hears their 
footsteps coming, and was going to skip under the bed; i reached for it, 
but it wasn't where i thought it would be; but i touched the curtain that 
hid mary jane's frocks, so i jumped in behind that and snuggled in 
amongst the gowns, and stood there perfectly still. 
they come in and shut the door; and the first thing the duke done was to 
get down and look under the bed. then i was glad i hadn't found the bed 
when i wanted it. and yet, you know, it's kind of natural to hide under 
the bed when you are up to anything private. they sets down then, and 
the king says: 
"well, what is it? and cut it middlin' short, because it's better for us 
to be down there a-whoopin' up the mournin' than up here givin' 'em a 
chance to talk us over." 
"well, this is it, capet. i ain't easy; i ain't comfortable. that 
doctor lays on my mind. i wanted to know your plans. i've got a notion, 
and i think it's a sound one." 
"what is it, duke?" 
"that we better glide out of this before three in the morning, and clip 
it down the river with what we've got. specially, seeing we got it so 
easy-given back to us, flung at our heads, as you may say, when of 
course we allowed to have to steal it back. i'm for knocking off and 
lighting out." 
that made me feel pretty bad. about an hour or two ago it would a been a 
little different, but now it made me feel bad and disappointed, the king 
rips out and says: 
"what! and not sell out the rest o' the property? march off like a 
passel of fools and leave eight or nine thous'n' dollars' worth o' 
property layin' around jest sufferin' to be scooped in?-and all good, 
salable stuff, too." 
the duke he grumbled; said the bag of gold was enough, and he didn't want 
to go no deeper-didn't want to rob a lot of orphans of everything they 
had. 
"why, how you talk!" says the king. "we sha'n't rob 'em of nothing at 
all but jest this money. the people that buys the property is the 
suff'rers; because as soon 's it's found out 'at we didn't own it-which 
won't be long after we've slid-the sale won't be valid, and it 'll all 
go back to the estate. these yer orphans 'll git their house back agin, 
and that's enough for them; they're young and spry, and k'n easy earn a 
livin'. they ain't a-goin to suffer. why, jest think-there's thous'n's 
and thous'n's that ain't nigh so well off. bless you, they ain't got 
noth'n' to complain of." 
well, the king he talked him blind; so at last he give in, and said all 
right, but said he believed it was blamed foolishness to stay, and that 
doctor hanging over them. but the king says: 
"cuss the doctor! what do we k'yer for him? hain't we got all the fools 
in town on our side? and ain't that a big enough majority in any town?" 
so they got ready to go down stairs again. the duke says: 
"i don't think we put that money in a good place." 
that cheered me up. i'd begun to think i warn't going to get a hint of 
no kind to help me. the king says: 
"why?" 
"because mary jane 'll be in mourning from this out; and first you know 
the nigger that does up the rooms will get an order to box these duds up 
and put 'em away; and do you reckon a nigger can run across money and not 
borrow some of it?" 
"your head's level agin, duke," says the king; and he comes a-fumbling 
under the curtain two or three foot from where i was. i stuck tight to 
the wall and kept mighty still, though quivery; and i wondered what them 
fellows would say to me if they catched me; and i tried to think what i'd 
better do if they did catch me. but the king he got the bag before i 
could think more than about a half a thought, and he never suspicioned i 
was around. they took and shoved the bag through a rip in the straw tick 
that was under the feather-bed, and crammed it in a foot or two amongst 
the straw and said it was all right now, because a nigger only makes up 
the feather-bed, and don't turn over the straw tick only about twice a 
year, and so it warn't in no danger of getting stole now. 
but i knowed better. i had it out of there before they was half-way down 
stairs. i groped along up to my cubby, and hid it there till i could get 
a chance to do better. i judged i better hide it outside of the house 
somewheres, because if they missed it they would give the house a good 
ransacking: i knowed that very well. then i turned in, with my clothes 
all on; but i couldn't a gone to sleep if i'd a wanted to, i was in such 
a sweat to get through with the business. by and by i heard the king and 
the duke come up; so i rolled off my pallet and laid with my chin at the 
top of my ladder, and waited to see if anything was going to happen. but 
nothing did. 
so i held on till all the late sounds had quit and the early ones hadn't 
begun yet; and then i slipped down the ladder. 
chapter xxvii. 
i crept to their doors and listened; they was snoring. so i tiptoed 
along, and got down stairs all right. there warn't a sound anywheres. i 
peeped through a crack of the dining-room door, and see the men that was 
watching the corpse all sound asleep on their chairs. the door was open 
into the parlor, where the corpse was laying, and there was a candle in 
both rooms. i passed along, and the parlor door was open; but i see there 
warn't nobody in there but the remainders of peter; so i shoved on by; 
but the front door was locked, and the key wasn't there. just then i 
heard somebody coming down the stairs, back behind me. i run in the 
parlor and took a swift look around, and the only place i see to hide the 
bag was in the coffin. the lid was shoved along about a foot, showing 
the dead man's face down in there, with a wet cloth over it, and his 
shroud on. i tucked the money-bag in under the lid, just down beyond 
where his hands was crossed, which made me creep, they was so cold, and 
then i run back across the room and in behind the door. 
the person coming was mary jane. she went to the coffin, very soft, and 
kneeled down and looked in; then she put up her handkerchief, and i see 
she begun to cry, though i couldn't hear her, and her back was to me. i 
slid out, and as i passed the dining-room i thought i'd make sure them 
watchers hadn't seen me; so i looked through the crack, and everything 
was all right. they hadn't stirred. 
i slipped up to bed, feeling ruther blue, on accounts of the thing 
playing out that way after i had took so much trouble and run so much 
resk about it. says i, if it could stay where it is, all right; because 
when we get down the river a hundred mile or two i could write back to 
mary jane, and she could dig him up again and get it; but that ain't the 
thing that's going to happen; the thing that's going to happen is, the 
money 'll be found when they come to screw on the lid. then the king 'll 
get it again, and it 'll be a long day before he gives anybody another 
chance to smouch it from him. of course i wanted to slide down and get it 
out of there, but i dasn't try it. every minute it was getting earlier 
now, and pretty soon some of them watchers would begin to stir, and i 
might get catched-catched with six thousand dollars in my hands that 
nobody hadn't hired me to take care of. i don't wish to be mixed up in 
no such business as that, i says to myself. 
when i got down stairs in the morning the parlor was shut up, and the 
watchers was gone. there warn't nobody around but the family and the 
widow bartley and our tribe. i watched their faces to see if anything 
had been happening, but i couldn't tell. 
towards the middle of the day the undertaker come with his man, and they 
set the coffin in the middle of the room on a couple of chairs, and then 
set all our chairs in rows, and borrowed more from the neighbors till the 
hall and the parlor and the dining-room was full. i see the coffin lid 
was the way it was before, but i dasn't go to look in under it, with 
folks around. 
then the people begun to flock in, and the beats and the girls took seats 
in the front row at the head of the coffin, and for a half an hour the 
people filed around slow, in single rank, and looked down at the dead 
man's face a minute, and some dropped in a tear, and it was all very 
still and solemn, only the girls and the beats holding handkerchiefs to 
their eyes and keeping their heads bent, and sobbing a little. there 
warn't no other sound but the scraping of the feet on the floor and 
blowing noses-because people always blows them more at a funeral than 
they do at other places except church. 
when the place was packed full the undertaker he slid around in his black 
gloves with his softy soothering ways, putting on the last touches, and 
getting people and things all ship-shape and comfortable, and making no 
more sound than a cat. he never spoke; he moved people around, he 
squeezed in late ones, he opened up passageways, and done it with nods, 
and signs with his hands. then he took his place over against the wall. 
he was the softest, glidingest, stealthiest man i ever see; and there 
warn't no more smile to him than there is to a ham. 
they had borrowed a melodeum-a sick one; and when everything was ready a 
young woman set down and worked it, and it was pretty skreeky and 
colicky, and everybody joined in and sung, and peter was the only one 
that had a good thing, according to my notion. then the reverend hobson 
opened up, slow and solemn, and begun to talk; and straight off the most 
outrageous row busted out in the cellar a body ever heard; it was only 
one dog, but he made a most powerful racket, and he kept it up right 
along; the parson he had to stand there, over the coffin, and wait-you 
couldn't hear yourself think. it was right down awkward, and nobody 
didn't seem to know what to do. but pretty soon they see that 
long-legged undertaker make a sign to the preacher as much as to say, 
"don't you worry-just depend on me." then he stooped down and begun to 
glide along the wall, just his shoulders showing over the people's heads. 
so he glided along, and the powwow and racket getting more and more 
outrageous all the time; and at last, when he had gone around two sides 
of the room, he disappears down cellar. then in about two seconds we 
heard a whack, and the dog he finished up with a most amazing howl or 
two, and then everything was dead still, and the parson begun his solemn 
talk where he left off. in a minute or two here comes this undertaker's 
back and shoulders gliding along the wall again; and so he glided and 
glided around three sides of the room, and then rose up, and shaded his 
mouth with his hands, and stretched his neck out towards the preacher, 
over the people's heads, and says, in a kind of a coarse whisper, "he had 
a rat!" then he drooped down and glided along the wall again to his 
place. you could see it was a great satisfaction to the people, because 
naturally they wanted to know. a little thing like that don't cost 
nothing, and it's just the little things that makes a man to be looked up 
to and liked. there warn't no more popular man in town than what that 
undertaker was. 
well, the funeral sermon was very good, but pison long and tiresome; and 
then the king he shoved in and got off some of his usual rubbage, and at 
last the job was through, and the undertaker begun to sneak up on the 
coffin with his screw-driver. i was in a sweat then, and watched him 
pretty keen. but he never meddled at all; just slid the lid along as soft 
as mush, and screwed it down tight and fast. so there i was! i didn't 
know whether the money was in there or not. so, says i, s'pose somebody 
has hogged that bag on the sly?-now how do i know whether to write to 
mary jane or not? s'pose she dug him up and didn't find nothing, what 
would she think of me? blame it, i says, i might get hunted up and 
jailed; i'd better lay low and keep dark, and not write at all; the 
thing's awful mixed now; trying to better it, i've worsened it a hundred 
times, and i wish to goodness i'd just let it alone, dad fetch the whole 
business! 
they buried him, and we come back home, and i went to watching faces 
again-i couldn't help it, and i couldn't rest easy. but nothing come 
of it; the faces didn't tell me nothing. 
the king he visited around in the evening, and sweetened everybody up, 
and made himself ever so friendly; and he give out the idea that his 
congregation over in england would be in a sweat about him, so he must 
hurry and settle up the estate right away and leave for home. he was 
very sorry he was so pushed, and so was everybody; they wished he could 
stay longer, but they said they could see it couldn't be done. and he 
said of course him and william would take the girls home with them; and 
that pleased everybody too, because then the girls would be well fixed 
and amongst their own relations; and it pleased the girls, too-tickled 
them so they clean forgot they ever had a trouble in the world; and told 
him to sell out as quick as he wanted to, they would be ready. them poor 
things was that glad and happy it made my heart ache to see them getting 
fooled and lied to so, but i didn't see no safe way for me to chip in and 
change the general tune. 
well, blamed if the king didn't bill the house and the niggers and all 
the property for auction straight off-sale two days after the funeral; 
but anybody could buy private beforehand if they wanted to. 
so the next day after the funeral, along about noon-time, the girls' joy 
got the first jolt. a couple of nigger traders come along, and the king 
sold them the niggers reasonable, for three-day drafts as they called it, 
and away they went, the two sons up the river to memphis, and their 
mother down the river to orleans. i thought them poor girls and them 
niggers would break their hearts for grief; they cried around each other, 
and took on so it most made me down sick to see it. the girls said they 
hadn't ever dreamed of seeing the family separated or sold away from the 
town. i can't ever get it out of my memory, the sight of them poor 
miserable girls and niggers hanging around each other's necks and crying; 
and i reckon i couldn't a stood it all, but would a had to bust out and 
tell on our gang if i hadn't knowed the sale warn't no account and the 
niggers would be back home in a week or two. 
the thing made a big stir in the town, too, and a good many come out 
flatfooted and said it was scandalous to separate the mother and the 
children that way. it injured the frauds some; but the old fool he 
bulled right along, spite of all the duke could say or do, and i tell you 
the duke was powerful uneasy. 
next day was auction day. about broad day in the morning the king and 
the duke come up in the garret and woke me up, and i see by their look 
that there was trouble. the king says: 
"was you in my room night before last?" 
"no, your majesty"-which was the way i always called him when nobody but 
our gang warn't around. 
"was you in there yisterday er last night?" 
"no, your majesty." 
"honor bright, now-no lies." 
"honor bright, your majesty, i'm telling you the truth. i hain't been 
a-near your room since miss mary jane took you and the duke and showed it 
to you." 
the duke says: 
"have you seen anybody else go in there?" 
"no, your grace, not as i remember, i believe." 
"stop and think." 
i studied awhile and see my chance; then i says: 
"well, i see the niggers go in there several times." 
both of them gave a little jump, and looked like they hadn't ever 
expected it, and then like they had. then the duke says: 
"what, all of them?" 
"no-leastways, not all at once-that is, i don't think i ever see them 
all come out at once but just one time." 
"hello! when was that?" 
"it was the day we had the funeral. in the morning. it warn't early, 
because i overslept. i was just starting down the ladder, and i see 
them." 
"well, go on, go on! what did they do? how'd they act?" 
"they didn't do nothing. and they didn't act anyway much, as fur as i 
see. they tiptoed away; so i seen, easy enough, that they'd shoved in 
there to do up your majesty's room, or something, s'posing you was up; 
and found you warn't up, and so they was hoping to slide out of the way 
of trouble without waking you up, if they hadn't already waked you up." 
"great guns, this is a go!" says the king; and both of them looked pretty 
sick and tolerable silly. they stood there a-thinking and scratching 
their heads a minute, and the duke he bust into a kind of a little raspy 
chuckle, and says: 
"it does beat all how neat the niggers played their hand. they let on to 
be sorry they was going out of this region! and i believed they was 
sorry, and so did you, and so did everybody. don't ever tell me any more 
that a nigger ain't got any histrionic talent. why, the way they played 
that thing it would fool anybody. in my opinion, there's a fortune in 
'em. if i had capital and a theater, i wouldn't want a better lay-out 
than that-and here we've gone and sold 'em for a song. yes, and ain't 
privileged to sing the song yet. say, where is that song-that draft?" 
"in the bank for to be collected. where would it be?" 
"well, that's all right then, thank goodness." 
says i, kind of timid-like: 
"is something gone wrong?" 
the king whirls on me and rips out: 
"none o' your business! you keep your head shet, and mind y'r own 
affairs-if you got any. long as you're in this town don't you forgit 
that-you hear?" then he says to the duke, "we got to jest swaller it 
and say noth'n': mum's the word for us." 
as they was starting down the ladder the duke he chuckles again, and 
says: 
"quick sales and small profits! it's a good business-yes." 
the king snarls around on him and says: 
"i was trying to do for the best in sellin' 'em out so quick. if the 
profits has turned out to be none, lackin' considable, and none to carry, 
is it my fault any more'n it's yourn?" 
"well, they'd be in this house yet and we wouldn't if i could a got my 
advice listened to." 
the king sassed back as much as was safe for him, and then swapped around 
and lit into me again. he give me down the banks for not coming and 
telling him i see the niggers come out of his room acting that way-said 
any fool would a knowed something was up. and then waltzed in and cussed 
himself awhile, and said it all come of him not laying late and taking 
his natural rest that morning, and he'd be blamed if he'd ever do it 
again. so they went off a-jawing; and i felt dreadful glad i'd worked it 
all off on to the niggers, and yet hadn't done the niggers no harm by it. 
chapter xxviii. 
by and by it was getting-up time. so i come down the ladder and started 
for down-stairs; but as i come to the girls' room the door was open, and 
i see mary jane setting by her old hair trunk, which was open and she'd 
been packing things in it-getting ready to go to england. but she had 
stopped now with a folded gown in her lap, and had her face in her hands, 
crying. i felt awful bad to see it; of course anybody would. i went in 
there and says: 
"miss mary jane, you can't a-bear to see people in trouble, and i can't 
most always. tell me about it." 
so she done it. and it was the niggers-i just expected it. she said 
the beautiful trip to england was most about spoiled for her; she didn't 
know how she was ever going to be happy there, knowing the mother and the 
children warn't ever going to see each other no more-and then busted out 
bitterer than ever, and flung up her hands, and says: 
"oh, dear, dear, to think they ain't ever going to see each other any 
more!" 
"but they will-and inside of two weeks-and i know it!" says i. 
laws, it was out before i could think! and before i could budge she 
throws her arms around my neck and told me to say it again, say it again, 
say it again! 
i see i had spoke too sudden and said too much, and was in a close place. 
i asked her to let me think a minute; and she set there, very impatient 
and excited and handsome, but looking kind of happy and eased-up, like a 
person that's had a tooth pulled out. so i went to studying it out. i 
says to myself, i reckon a body that ups and tells the truth when he is 
in a tight place is taking considerable many resks, though i ain't had no 
experience, and can't say for certain; but it looks so to me, anyway; and 
yet here's a case where i'm blest if it don't look to me like the truth 
is better and actuly safer than a lie. i must lay it by in my mind, and 
think it over some time or other, it's so kind of strange and unregular. 
i never see nothing like it. well, i says to myself at last, i'm a-going 
to chance it; i'll up and tell the truth this time, though it does seem 
most like setting down on a kag of powder and touching it off just to see 
where you'll go to. then i says: 
"miss mary jane, is there any place out of town a little ways where you 
could go and stay three or four days?" 
"yes; mr. lothrop's. why?" 
"never mind why yet. if i'll tell you how i know the niggers will see 
each other again inside of two weeks-here in this house-and prove how i 
know it-will you go to mr. lothrop's and stay four days?" 
"four days!" she says; "i'll stay a year!" 
"all right," i says, "i don't want nothing more out of you than just your 
word-i druther have it than another man's kiss-the-bible." she smiled 
and reddened up very sweet, and i says, "if you don't mind it, i'll shut 
the door-and bolt it." 
then i come back and set down again, and says: 
"don't you holler. just set still and take it like a man. i got to tell 
the truth, and you want to brace up, miss mary, because it's a bad kind, 
and going to be hard to take, but there ain't no help for it. these 
uncles of yourn ain't no uncles at all; they're a couple of frauds 
regular dead-beats. there, now we're over the worst of it, you can stand 
the rest middling easy." 
it jolted her up like everything, of course; but i was over the shoal 
water now, so i went right along, her eyes a-blazing higher and higher 
all the time, and told her every blame thing, from where we first struck 
that young fool going up to the steamboat, clear through to where she 
flung herself on to the king's breast at the front door and he kissed her 
sixteen or seventeen times-and then up she jumps, with her face afire 
like sunset, and says: 
"the brute! come, don't waste a minute-not a second-we'll have them 
tarred and feathered, and flung in the river!" 
says i: 
"cert'nly. but do you mean before you go to mr. lothrop's, or-" 
"oh," she says, "what am i thinking about!" she says, and set right down 
again. "don't mind what i said-please don't-you won't, now, will you?" 
laying her silky hand on mine in that kind of a way that i said i would 
die first. "i never thought, i was so stirred up," she says; "now go on, 
and i won't do so any more. you tell me what to do, and whatever you say 
i'll do it." 
"well," i says, "it's a rough gang, them two frauds, and i'm fixed so i 
got to travel with them a while longer, whether i want to or not-i 
druther not tell you why; and if you was to blow on them this town would 
get me out of their claws, and i'd be all right; but there'd be another 
person that you don't know about who'd be in big trouble. well, we got 
to save him, hain't we? of course. well, then, we won't blow on them." 
saying them words put a good idea in my head. i see how maybe i could 
get me and jim rid of the frauds; get them jailed here, and then leave. 
but i didn't want to run the raft in the daytime without anybody aboard 
to answer questions but me; so i didn't want the plan to begin working 
till pretty late to-night. i says: 
"miss mary jane, i'll tell you what we'll do, and you won't have to stay 
at mr. lothrop's so long, nuther. how fur is it?" 
"a little short of four miles-right out in the country, back here." 
"well, that 'll answer. now you go along out there, and lay low till 
nine or half-past to-night, and then get them to fetch you home again 
tell them you've thought of something. if you get here before eleven put 
a candle in this window, and if i don't turn up wait till eleven, and 
then if i don't turn up it means i'm gone, and out of the way, and safe. 
then you come out and spread the news around, and get these beats 
jailed." 
"good," she says, "i'll do it." 
"and if it just happens so that i don't get away, but get took up along 
with them, you must up and say i told you the whole thing beforehand, and 
you must stand by me all you can." 
"stand by you! indeed i will. they sha'n't touch a hair of your head!" 
she says, and i see her nostrils spread and her eyes snap when she said 
it, too. 
"if i get away i sha'n't be here," i says, "to prove these rapscallions 
ain't your uncles, and i couldn't do it if i was here. i could swear 
they was beats and bummers, that's all, though that's worth something. 
well, there's others can do that better than what i can, and they're 
people that ain't going to be doubted as quick as i'd be. i'll tell you 
how to find them. gimme a pencil and a piece of paper. there-'royal 
nonesuch, bricksville.' put it away, and don't lose it. when the court 
wants to find out something about these two, let them send up to 
bricksville and say they've got the men that played the royal nonesuch, 
and ask for some witnesses-why, you'll have that entire town down here 
before you can hardly wink, miss mary. and they'll come a-biling, too." 
i judged we had got everything fixed about right now. so i says: 
"just let the auction go right along, and don't worry. nobody don't have 
to pay for the things they buy till a whole day after the auction on 
accounts of the short notice, and they ain't going out of this till they 
get that money; and the way we've fixed it the sale ain't going to count, 
and they ain't going to get no money. it's just like the way it was with 
the niggers-it warn't no sale, and the niggers will be back before 
long. why, they can't collect the money for the niggers yet-they're in 
the worst kind of a fix, miss mary." 
"well," she says, "i'll run down to breakfast now, and then i'll start 
straight for mr. lothrop's." 
"'deed, that ain't the ticket, miss mary jane," i says, "by no manner of 
means; go before breakfast." 
"why?" 
"what did you reckon i wanted you to go at all for, miss mary?" 
"well, i never thought-and come to think, i don't know. what was it?" 
"why, it's because you ain't one of these leather-face people. i don't 
want no better book than what your face is. a body can set down and read 
it off like coarse print. do you reckon you can go and face your uncles 
when they come to kiss you good-morning, and never-" 
"there, there, don't! yes, i'll go before breakfast-i'll be glad to. 
and leave my sisters with them?" 
"yes; never mind about them. they've got to stand it yet a while. they 
might suspicion something if all of you was to go. i don't want you to 
see them, nor your sisters, nor nobody in this town; if a neighbor was to 
ask how is your uncles this morning your face would tell something. no, 
you go right along, miss mary jane, and i'll fix it with all of them. 
i'll tell miss susan to give your love to your uncles and say you've went 
away for a few hours for to get a little rest and change, or to see a 
friend, and you'll be back to-night or early in the morning." 
"gone to see a friend is all right, but i won't have my love given to 
them." 
"well, then, it sha'n't be." it was well enough to tell her so-no harm 
in it. it was only a little thing to do, and no trouble; and it's the 
little things that smooths people's roads the most, down here below; it 
would make mary jane comfortable, and it wouldn't cost nothing. then i 
says: "there's one more thing-that bag of money." 
"well, they've got that; and it makes me feel pretty silly to think how 
they got it." 
"no, you're out, there. they hain't got it." 
"why, who's got it?" 
"i wish i knowed, but i don't. i had it, because i stole it from them; 
and i stole it to give to you; and i know where i hid it, but i'm afraid 
it ain't there no more. i'm awful sorry, miss mary jane, i'm just as 
sorry as i can be; but i done the best i could; i did honest. i come 
nigh getting caught, and i had to shove it into the first place i come 
to, and run-and it warn't a good place." 
"oh, stop blaming yourself-it's too bad to do it, and i won't allow it 
you couldn't help it; it wasn't your fault. where did you hide it?" 
i didn't want to set her to thinking about her troubles again; and i 
couldn't seem to get my mouth to tell her what would make her see that 
corpse laying in the coffin with that bag of money on his stomach. so 
for a minute i didn't say nothing; then i says: 
"i'd ruther not tell you where i put it, miss mary jane, if you don't 
mind letting me off; but i'll write it for you on a piece of paper, and 
you can read it along the road to mr. lothrop's, if you want to. do you 
reckon that 'll do?" 
"oh, yes." 
so i wrote: "i put it in the coffin. it was in there when you was 
crying there, away in the night. i was behind the door, and i was mighty 
sorry for you, miss mary jane." 
it made my eyes water a little to remember her crying there all by 
herself in the night, and them devils laying there right under her own 
roof, shaming her and robbing her; and when i folded it up and give it to 
her i see the water come into her eyes, too; and she shook me by the 
hand, hard, and says: 
"good-bye. i'm going to do everything just as you've told me; and if i 
don't ever see you again, i sha'n't ever forget you and i'll think of 
you a many and a many a time, and i'll pray for you, too!"-and she was 
gone. 
pray for me! i reckoned if she knowed me she'd take a job that was more 
nearer her size. but i bet she done it, just the same-she was just that 
kind. she had the grit to pray for judus if she took the notion-there 
warn't no back-down to her, i judge. you may say what you want to, but 
in my opinion she had more sand in her than any girl i ever see; in my 
opinion she was just full of sand. it sounds like flattery, but it ain't 
no flattery. and when it comes to beauty-and goodness, too-she lays 
over them all. i hain't ever seen her since that time that i see her go 
out of that door; no, i hain't ever seen her since, but i reckon i've 
thought of her a many and a many a million times, and of her saying she 
would pray for me; and if ever i'd a thought it would do any good for me 
to pray for her, blamed if i wouldn't a done it or bust. 
well, mary jane she lit out the back way, i reckon; because nobody see 
her go. when i struck susan and the hare-lip, i says: 
"what's the name of them people over on t'other side of the river that 
you all goes to see sometimes?" 
they says: 
"there's several; but it's the proctors, mainly." 
"that's the name," i says; "i most forgot it. well, miss mary jane she 
told me to tell you she's gone over there in a dreadful hurry-one of 
them's sick." 
"which one?" 
"i don't know; leastways, i kinder forget; but i thinks it's-" 
"sakes alive, i hope it ain't hanner?" 
"i'm sorry to say it," i says, "but hanner's the very one." 
"my goodness, and she so well only last week! is she took bad?" 
"it ain't no name for it. they set up with her all night, miss mary jane 
said, and they don't think she'll last many hours." 
"only think of that, now! what's the matter with her?" 
i couldn't think of anything reasonable, right off that way, so i says: 
"mumps." 
"mumps your granny! they don't set up with people that's got the mumps." 
"they don't, don't they? you better bet they do with these mumps. these 
mumps is different. it's a new kind, miss mary jane said." 
"how's it a new kind?" 
"because it's mixed up with other things." 
"what other things?" 
"well, measles, and whooping-cough, and erysiplas, and consumption, and 
yaller janders, and brain-fever, and i don't know what all." 
"my land! and they call it the mumps?" 
"that's what miss mary jane said." 
"well, what in the nation do they call it the mumps for?" 
"why, because it is the mumps. that's what it starts with." 
"well, ther' ain't no sense in it. a body might stump his toe, and take 
pison, and fall down the well, and break his neck, and bust his brains 
out, and somebody come along and ask what killed him, and some numskull 
up and say, 'why, he stumped his toe.' would ther' be any sense in that? 
no. and ther' ain't no sense in this, nuther. is it ketching?" 
"is it ketching? why, how you talk. is a harrow catching-in the dark? 
if you don't hitch on to one tooth, you're bound to on another, ain't 
you? and you can't get away with that tooth without fetching the whole 
harrow along, can you? well, these kind of mumps is a kind of a harrow, 
as you may say-and it ain't no slouch of a harrow, nuther, you come to 
get it hitched on good." 
"well, it's awful, i think," says the hare-lip. "i'll go to uncle harvey 
and-" 
"oh, yes," i says, "i would. of course i would. i wouldn't lose no 
time." 
"well, why wouldn't you?" 
"just look at it a minute, and maybe you can see. hain't your uncles 
obleegd to get along home to england as fast as they can? and do you 
reckon they'd be mean enough to go off and leave you to go all that 
journey by yourselves? you know they'll wait for you. so fur, so good. 
your uncle harvey's a preacher, ain't he? very well, then; is a preacher 
going to deceive a steamboat clerk? is he going to deceive a ship clerk? 
so as to get them to let miss mary jane go aboard? now you know he 
ain't. what will he do, then? why, he'll say, 'it's a great pity, but 
my church matters has got to get along the best way they can; for my 
niece has been exposed to the dreadful pluribus-unum mumps, and so it's 
my bounden duty to set down here and wait the three months it takes to 
show on her if she's got it.' but never mind, if you think it's best to 
tell your uncle harvey-" 
"shucks, and stay fooling around here when we could all be having good 
times in england whilst we was waiting to find out whether mary jane's 
got it or not? why, you talk like a muggins." 
"well, anyway, maybe you'd better tell some of the neighbors." 
"listen at that, now. you do beat all for natural stupidness. can't you 
see that they'd go and tell? ther' ain't no way but just to not tell 
anybody at all." 
"well, maybe you're right-yes, i judge you are right." 
"but i reckon we ought to tell uncle harvey she's gone out a while, 
anyway, so he won't be uneasy about her?" 
"yes, miss mary jane she wanted you to do that. she says, 'tell them to 
give uncle harvey and william my love and a kiss, and say i've run over 
the river to see mr.'-mr.-what is the name of that rich family your 
uncle peter used to think so much of?-i mean the one that-" 
"why, you must mean the apthorps, ain't it?" 
"of course; bother them kind of names, a body can't ever seem to remember 
them, half the time, somehow. yes, she said, say she has run over for to 
ask the apthorps to be sure and come to the auction and buy this house, 
because she allowed her uncle peter would ruther they had it than anybody 
else; and she's going to stick to them till they say they'll come, and 
then, if she ain't too tired, she's coming home; and if she is, she'll be 
home in the morning anyway. she said, don't say nothing about the 
proctors, but only about the apthorps-which 'll be perfectly true, 
because she is going there to speak about their buying the house; i know 
it, because she told me so herself." 
"all right," they said, and cleared out to lay for their uncles, and give 
them the love and the kisses, and tell them the message. 
everything was all right now. the girls wouldn't say nothing because 
they wanted to go to england; and the king and the duke would ruther mary 
jane was off working for the auction than around in reach of doctor 
robinson. i felt very good; i judged i had done it pretty neat-i 
reckoned tom sawyer couldn't a done it no neater himself. of course he 
would a throwed more style into it, but i can't do that very handy, not 
being brung up to it. 
well, they held the auction in the public square, along towards the end 
of the afternoon, and it strung along, and strung along, and the old man 
he was on hand and looking his level pisonest, up there longside of the 
auctioneer, and chipping in a little scripture now and then, or a little 
goody-goody saying of some kind, and the duke he was around goo-gooing 
for sympathy all he knowed how, and just spreading himself generly. 
but by and by the thing dragged through, and everything was sold 
everything but a little old trifling lot in the graveyard. so they'd got 
to work that off-i never see such a girafft as the king was for wanting 
to swallow everything. well, whilst they was at it a steamboat landed, 
and in about two minutes up comes a crowd a-whooping and yelling and 
laughing and carrying on, and singing out: 
"here's your opposition line! here's your two sets o' heirs to old peter 
wilks-and you pays your money and you takes your choice!" 
chapter xxix. 
they was fetching a very nice-looking old gentleman along, and a 
nice-looking younger one, with his right arm in a sling. and, my souls, 
how the people yelled and laughed, and kept it up. but i didn't see no 
joke about it, and i judged it would strain the duke and the king some to 
see any. i reckoned they'd turn pale. but no, nary a pale did they 
turn. the duke he never let on he suspicioned what was up, but just went 
a goo-gooing around, happy and satisfied, like a jug that's googling out 
buttermilk; and as for the king, he just gazed and gazed down sorrowful 
on them new-comers like it give him the stomach-ache in his very heart to 
think there could be such frauds and rascals in the world. oh, he done 
it admirable. lots of the principal people gethered around the king, to 
let him see they was on his side. that old gentleman that had just come 
looked all puzzled to death. pretty soon he begun to speak, and i see 
straight off he pronounced like an englishman-not the king's way, though 
the king's was pretty good for an imitation. i can't give the old gent's 
words, nor i can't imitate him; but he turned around to the crowd, and 
says, about like this: 
"this is a surprise to me which i wasn't looking for; and i'll 
acknowledge, candid and frank, i ain't very well fixed to meet it and 
answer it; for my brother and me has had misfortunes; he's broke his arm, 
and our baggage got put off at a town above here last night in the night 
by a mistake. i am peter wilks' brother harvey, and this is his brother 
william, which can't hear nor speak-and can't even make signs to amount 
to much, now't he's only got one hand to work them with. we are who we 
say we are; and in a day or two, when i get the baggage, i can prove it. 
but up till then i won't say nothing more, but go to the hotel and wait." 
so him and the new dummy started off; and the king he laughs, and 
blethers out: 
"broke his arm-very likely, ain't it?-and very convenient, too, for a 
fraud that's got to make signs, and ain't learnt how. lost their 
baggage! that's mighty good!-and mighty ingenious-under the 
circumstances!" 
so he laughed again; and so did everybody else, except three or four, or 
maybe half a dozen. one of these was that doctor; another one was a 
sharp-looking gentleman, with a carpet-bag of the old-fashioned kind made 
out of carpet-stuff, that had just come off of the steamboat and was 
talking to him in a low voice, and glancing towards the king now and then 
and nodding their heads-it was levi bell, the lawyer that was gone up to 
louisville; and another one was a big rough husky that come along and 
listened to all the old gentleman said, and was listening to the king 
now. and when the king got done this husky up and says: 
"say, looky here; if you are harvey wilks, when'd you come to this town?" 
"the day before the funeral, friend," says the king. 
"but what time o' day?" 
"in the evenin'-'bout an hour er two before sundown." 
"how'd you come?" 
"i come down on the susan powell from cincinnati." 
"well, then, how'd you come to be up at the pint in the mornin'-in a 
canoe?" 
"i warn't up at the pint in the mornin'." 
"it's a lie." 
several of them jumped for him and begged him not to talk that way to an 
old man and a preacher. 
"preacher be hanged, he's a fraud and a liar. he was up at the pint that 
mornin'. i live up there, don't i? well, i was up there, and he was up 
there. i see him there. he come in a canoe, along with tim collins and 
a boy." 
the doctor he up and says: 
"would you know the boy again if you was to see him, hines?" 
"i reckon i would, but i don't know. why, yonder he is, now. i know him 
perfectly easy." 
it was me he pointed at. the doctor says: 
"neighbors, i don't know whether the new couple is frauds or not; but if 
these two ain't frauds, i am an idiot, that's all. i think it's our duty 
to see that they don't get away from here till we've looked into this 
thing. come along, hines; come along, the rest of you. we'll take these 
fellows to the tavern and affront them with t'other couple, and i reckon 
we'll find out something before we get through." 
it was nuts for the crowd, though maybe not for the king's friends; so we 
all started. it was about sundown. the doctor he led me along by the 
hand, and was plenty kind enough, but he never let go my hand. 
we all got in a big room in the hotel, and lit up some candles, and 
fetched in the new couple. first, the doctor says: 
"i don't wish to be too hard on these two men, but i think they're 
frauds, and they may have complices that we don't know nothing about. if 
they have, won't the complices get away with that bag of gold peter wilks 
left? it ain't unlikely. if these men ain't frauds, they won't object 
to sending for that money and letting us keep it till they prove they're 
all right-ain't that so?" 
everybody agreed to that. so i judged they had our gang in a pretty 
tight place right at the outstart. but the king he only looked 
sorrowful, and says: 
"gentlemen, i wish the money was there, for i ain't got no disposition to 
throw anything in the way of a fair, open, out-and-out investigation o' 
this misable business; but, alas, the money ain't there; you k'n send and 
see, if you want to." 
"where is it, then?" 
"well, when my niece give it to me to keep for her i took and hid it 
inside o' the straw tick o' my bed, not wishin' to bank it for the few 
days we'd be here, and considerin' the bed a safe place, we not bein' 
used to niggers, and suppos'n' 'em honest, like servants in england. the 
niggers stole it the very next mornin' after i had went down stairs; and 
when i sold 'em i hadn't missed the money yit, so they got clean away 
with it. my servant here k'n tell you 'bout it, gentlemen." 
the doctor and several said "shucks!" and i see nobody didn't altogether 
believe him. one man asked me if i see the niggers steal it. i said no, 
but i see them sneaking out of the room and hustling away, and i never 
thought nothing, only i reckoned they was afraid they had waked up my 
master and was trying to get away before he made trouble with them. that 
was all they asked me. then the doctor whirls on me and says: 
"are you english, too?" 
i says yes; and him and some others laughed, and said, "stuff!" 
well, then they sailed in on the general investigation, and there we had 
it, up and down, hour in, hour out, and nobody never said a word about 
supper, nor ever seemed to think about it-and so they kept it up, and 
kept it up; and it was the worst mixed-up thing you ever see. they made 
the king tell his yarn, and they made the old gentleman tell his'n; and 
anybody but a lot of prejudiced chuckleheads would a seen that the old 
gentleman was spinning truth and t'other one lies. and by and by they 
had me up to tell what i knowed. the king he give me a left-handed look 
out of the corner of his eye, and so i knowed enough to talk on the right 
side. i begun to tell about sheffield, and how we lived there, and all 
about the english wilkses, and so on; but i didn't get pretty fur till 
the doctor begun to laugh; and levi bell, the lawyer, says: 
"set down, my boy; i wouldn't strain myself if i was you. i reckon you 
ain't used to lying, it don't seem to come handy; what you want is 
practice. you do it pretty awkward." 
i didn't care nothing for the compliment, but i was glad to be let off, 
anyway. 
the doctor he started to say something, and turns and says: 
"if you'd been in town at first, levi bell-" the king broke in and 
reached out his hand, and says: 
"why, is this my poor dead brother's old friend that he's wrote so often 
about?" 
the lawyer and him shook hands, and the lawyer smiled and looked pleased, 
and they talked right along awhile, and then got to one side and talked 
low; and at last the lawyer speaks up and says: 
"that 'll fix it. i'll take the order and send it, along with your 
brother's, and then they'll know it's all right." 
so they got some paper and a pen, and the king he set down and twisted 
his head to one side, and chawed his tongue, and scrawled off something; 
and then they give the pen to the duke-and then for the first time the 
duke looked sick. but he took the pen and wrote. so then the lawyer 
turns to the new old gentleman and says: 
"you and your brother please write a line or two and sign your names." 
the old gentleman wrote, but nobody couldn't read it. the lawyer looked 
powerful astonished, and says: 
"well, it beats me"-and snaked a lot of old letters out of his pocket, 
and examined them, and then examined the old man's writing, and then them 
again; and then says: "these old letters is from harvey wilks; and 
here's these two handwritings, and anybody can see they didn't write 
them" (the king and the duke looked sold and foolish, i tell you, to see 
how the lawyer had took them in), "and here's this old gentleman's hand 
writing, and anybody can tell, easy enough, he didn't write them-fact 
is, the scratches he makes ain't properly writing at all. now, here's 
some letters from-" 
the new old gentleman says: 
"if you please, let me explain. nobody can read my hand but my brother 
there-so he copies for me. it's his hand you've got there, not mine." 
"well!" says the lawyer, "this is a state of things. i've got some of 
william's letters, too; so if you'll get him to write a line or so we can 
com-" 
"he can't write with his left hand," says the old gentleman. "if he 
could use his right hand, you would see that he wrote his own letters and 
mine too. look at both, please-they're by the same hand." 
the lawyer done it, and says: 
"i believe it's so-and if it ain't so, there's a heap stronger 
resemblance than i'd noticed before, anyway. well, well, well! i 
thought we was right on the track of a solution, but it's gone to grass, 
partly. but anyway, one thing is proved-these two ain't either of 'em 
wilkses"-and he wagged his head towards the king and the duke. 
well, what do you think? that muleheaded old fool wouldn't give in then! 
indeed he wouldn't. said it warn't no fair test. said his brother 
william was the cussedest joker in the world, and hadn't tried to write 
he see william was going to play one of his jokes the minute he put the 
pen to paper. and so he warmed up and went warbling right along till he 
was actuly beginning to believe what he was saying himself; but pretty 
soon the new gentleman broke in, and says: 
"i've thought of something. is there anybody here that helped to lay out 
my br-helped to lay out the late peter wilks for burying?" 
"yes," says somebody, "me and ab turner done it. we're both here." 
then the old man turns towards the king, and says: 
"perhaps this gentleman can tell me what was tattooed on his breast?" 
blamed if the king didn't have to brace up mighty quick, or he'd a 
squshed down like a bluff bank that the river has cut under, it took him 
so sudden; and, mind you, it was a thing that was calculated to make most 
anybody sqush to get fetched such a solid one as that without any notice, 
because how was he going to know what was tattooed on the man? he 
whitened a little; he couldn't help it; and it was mighty still in there, 
and everybody bending a little forwards and gazing at him. says i to 
myself, now he'll throw up the sponge-there ain't no more use. well, 
did he? a body can't hardly believe it, but he didn't. i reckon he 
thought he'd keep the thing up till he tired them people out, so they'd 
thin out, and him and the duke could break loose and get away. anyway, 
he set there, and pretty soon he begun to smile, and says: 
"mf! it's a very tough question, ain't it! yes, sir, i k'n tell you 
what's tattooed on his breast. it's jest a small, thin, blue arrow 
that's what it is; and if you don't look clost, you can't see it. now 
what do you say-hey?" 
well, i never see anything like that old blister for clean out-and-out 
cheek. 
the new old gentleman turns brisk towards ab turner and his pard, and his 
eye lights up like he judged he'd got the king this time, and says: 
"there-you've heard what he said! was there any such mark on peter 
wilks' breast?" 
both of them spoke up and says: 
"we didn't see no such mark." 
"good!" says the old gentleman. "now, what you did see on his breast was 
a small dim p, and a b (which is an initial he dropped when he was 
young), and a w, with dashes between them, so: p-b-w"-and he marked 
them that way on a piece of paper. "come, ain't that what you saw?" 
both of them spoke up again, and says: 
"no, we didn't. we never seen any marks at all." 
well, everybody was in a state of mind now, and they sings out: 
"the whole bilin' of 'm 's frauds! le's duck 'em! le's drown 'em! le's 
ride 'em on a rail!" and everybody was whooping at once, and there was a 
rattling powwow. but the lawyer he jumps on the table and yells, and 
says: 
"gentlemen-gentlemen! hear me just a word-just a single word-if you 
please! there's one way yet-let's go and dig up the corpse and look." 
that took them. 
"hooray!" they all shouted, and was starting right off; but the lawyer 
and the doctor sung out: 
"hold on, hold on! collar all these four men and the boy, and fetch them 
along, too!" 
"we'll do it!" they all shouted; "and if we don't find them marks we'll 
lynch the whole gang!" 
i was scared, now, i tell you. but there warn't no getting away, you 
know. they gripped us all, and marched us right along, straight for the 
graveyard, which was a mile and a half down the river, and the whole town 
at our heels, for we made noise enough, and it was only nine in the 
evening. 
as we went by our house i wished i hadn't sent mary jane out of town; 
because now if i could tip her the wink she'd light out and save me, and 
blow on our dead-beats. 
well, we swarmed along down the river road, just carrying on like 
wildcats; and to make it more scary the sky was darking up, and the 
lightning beginning to wink and flitter, and the wind to shiver amongst 
the leaves. this was the most awful trouble and most dangersome i ever 
was in; and i was kinder stunned; everything was going so different from 
what i had allowed for; stead of being fixed so i could take my own time 
if i wanted to, and see all the fun, and have mary jane at my back to 
save me and set me free when the close-fit come, here was nothing in the 
world betwixt me and sudden death but just them tattoo-marks. if they 
didn't find them- 
i couldn't bear to think about it; and yet, somehow, i couldn't think 
about nothing else. it got darker and darker, and it was a beautiful 
time to give the crowd the slip; but that big husky had me by the wrist 
hines-and a body might as well try to give goliar the slip. he dragged 
me right along, he was so excited, and i had to run to keep up. 
when they got there they swarmed into the graveyard and washed over it 
like an overflow. and when they got to the grave they found they had 
about a hundred times as many shovels as they wanted, but nobody hadn't 
thought to fetch a lantern. but they sailed into digging anyway by the 
flicker of the lightning, and sent a man to the nearest house, a half a 
mile off, to borrow one. 
so they dug and dug like everything; and it got awful dark, and the rain 
started, and the wind swished and swushed along, and the lightning come 
brisker and brisker, and the thunder boomed; but them people never took 
no notice of it, they was so full of this business; and one minute you 
could see everything and every face in that big crowd, and the shovelfuls 
of dirt sailing up out of the grave, and the next second the dark wiped 
it all out, and you couldn't see nothing at all. 
at last they got out the coffin and begun to unscrew the lid, and then 
such another crowding and shouldering and shoving as there was, to 
scrouge in and get a sight, you never see; and in the dark, that way, it 
was awful. hines he hurt my wrist dreadful pulling and tugging so, and i 
reckon he clean forgot i was in the world, he was so excited and panting. 
all of a sudden the lightning let go a perfect sluice of white glare, and 
somebody sings out: 
"by the living jingo, here's the bag of gold on his breast!" 
hines let out a whoop, like everybody else, and dropped my wrist and give 
a big surge to bust his way in and get a look, and the way i lit out and 
shinned for the road in the dark there ain't nobody can tell. 
i had the road all to myself, and i fairly flew-leastways, i had it all 
to myself except the solid dark, and the now-and-then glares, and the 
buzzing of the rain, and the thrashing of the wind, and the splitting of 
the thunder; and sure as you are born i did clip it along! 
when i struck the town i see there warn't nobody out in the storm, so i 
never hunted for no back streets, but humped it straight through the main 
one; and when i begun to get towards our house i aimed my eye and set it. 
no light there; the house all dark-which made me feel sorry and 
disappointed, i didn't know why. but at last, just as i was sailing by, 
flash comes the light in mary jane's window! and my heart swelled up 
sudden, like to bust; and the same second the house and all was behind me 
in the dark, and wasn't ever going to be before me no more in this world. 
she was the best girl i ever see, and had the most sand. 
the minute i was far enough above the town to see i could make the 
towhead, i begun to look sharp for a boat to borrow, and the first time 
the lightning showed me one that wasn't chained i snatched it and shoved. 
it was a canoe, and warn't fastened with nothing but a rope. the towhead 
was a rattling big distance off, away out there in the middle of the 
river, but i didn't lose no time; and when i struck the raft at last i 
was so fagged i would a just laid down to blow and gasp if i could 
afforded it. but i didn't. as i sprung aboard i sung out: 
"out with you, jim, and set her loose! glory be to goodness, we're shut 
of them!" 
jim lit out, and was a-coming for me with both arms spread, he was so 
full of joy; but when i glimpsed him in the lightning my heart shot up in 
my mouth and i went overboard backwards; for i forgot he was old king 
lear and a drownded a-rab all in one, and it most scared the livers and 
lights out of me. but jim fished me out, and was going to hug me and 
bless me, and so on, he was so glad i was back and we was shut of the 
king and the duke, but i says: 
"not now; have it for breakfast, have it for breakfast! cut loose and 
let her slide!" 
so in two seconds away we went a-sliding down the river, and it did seem 
so good to be free again and all by ourselves on the big river, and 
nobody to bother us. i had to skip around a bit, and jump up and crack 
my heels a few times-i couldn't help it; but about the third crack i 
noticed a sound that i knowed mighty well, and held my breath and 
listened and waited; and sure enough, when the next flash busted out over 
the water, here they come!-and just a-laying to their oars and making 
their skiff hum! it was the king and the duke. 
so i wilted right down on to the planks then, and give up; and it was all 
i could do to keep from crying. 
chapter xxx. 
when they got aboard the king went for me, and shook me by the collar, 
and says: 
"tryin' to give us the slip, was ye, you pup! tired of our company, 
hey?" 
i says: 
"no, your majesty, we warn't-please don't, your majesty!" 
"quick, then, and tell us what was your idea, or i'll shake the insides 
out o' you!" 
"honest, i'll tell you everything just as it happened, your majesty. the 
man that had a-holt of me was very good to me, and kept saying he had a 
boy about as big as me that died last year, and he was sorry to see a boy 
in such a dangerous fix; and when they was all took by surprise by 
finding the gold, and made a rush for the coffin, he lets go of me and 
whispers, 'heel it now, or they'll hang ye, sure!' and i lit out. it 
didn't seem no good for me to stay-i couldn't do nothing, and i didn't 
want to be hung if i could get away. so i never stopped running till i 
found the canoe; and when i got here i told jim to hurry, or they'd catch 
me and hang me yet, and said i was afeard you and the duke wasn't alive 
now, and i was awful sorry, and so was jim, and was awful glad when we 
see you coming; you may ask jim if i didn't." 
jim said it was so; and the king told him to shut up, and said, "oh, yes, 
it's mighty likely!" and shook me up again, and said he reckoned he'd 
drownd me. but the duke says: 
"leggo the boy, you old idiot! would you a done any different? did you 
inquire around for him when you got loose? i don't remember it." 
so the king let go of me, and begun to cuss that town and everybody in 
it. but the duke says: 
"you better a blame' sight give yourself a good cussing, for you're the 
one that's entitled to it most. you hain't done a thing from the start 
that had any sense in it, except coming out so cool and cheeky with that 
imaginary blue-arrow mark. that was bright-it was right down bully; and 
it was the thing that saved us. for if it hadn't been for that they'd a 
jailed us till them englishmen's baggage come-and then-the 
penitentiary, you bet! but that trick took 'em to the graveyard, and the 
gold done us a still bigger kindness; for if the excited fools hadn't let 
go all holts and made that rush to get a look we'd a slept in our cravats 
to-night-cravats warranted to wear, too-longer than we'd need 'em." 
they was still a minute-thinking; then the king says, kind of 
absent-minded like: 
"mf! and we reckoned the niggers stole it!" 
that made me squirm! 
"yes," says the duke, kinder slow and deliberate and sarcastic, "we did." 
after about a half a minute the king drawls out: 
"leastways, i did." 
the duke says, the same way: 
"on the contrary, i did." 
the king kind of ruffles up, and says: 
"looky here, bilgewater, what'r you referrin' to?" 
the duke says, pretty brisk: 
"when it comes to that, maybe you'll let me ask, what was you referring 
to?" 
"shucks!" says the king, very sarcastic; "but i don't know-maybe you was 
asleep, and didn't know what you was about." 
the duke bristles up now, and says: 
"oh, let up on this cussed nonsense; do you take me for a blame' fool? 
don't you reckon i know who hid that money in that coffin?" 
"yes, sir! i know you do know, because you done it yourself!" 
"it's a lie!"-and the duke went for him. the king sings out: 
"take y'r hands off!-leggo my throat!-i take it all back!" 
the duke says: 
"well, you just own up, first, that you did hide that money there, 
intending to give me the slip one of these days, and come back and dig it 
up, and have it all to yourself." 
"wait jest a minute, duke-answer me this one question, honest and fair; 
if you didn't put the money there, say it, and i'll b'lieve you, and take 
back everything i said." 
"you old scoundrel, i didn't, and you know i didn't. there, now!" 
"well, then, i b'lieve you. but answer me only jest this one more-now 
don't git mad; didn't you have it in your mind to hook the money and hide 
it?" 
the duke never said nothing for a little bit; then he says: 
"well, i don't care if i did, i didn't do it, anyway. but you not only 
had it in mind to do it, but you done it." 
"i wisht i never die if i done it, duke, and that's honest. i won't say 
i warn't goin' to do it, because i was; but you-i mean somebody-got in 
ahead o' me." 
"it's a lie! you done it, and you got to say you done it, or-" 
the king began to gurgle, and then he gasps out: 
"'nough!-i own up!" 
i was very glad to hear him say that; it made me feel much more easier 
than what i was feeling before. so the duke took his hands off and says: 
"if you ever deny it again i'll drown you. it's well for you to set 
there and blubber like a baby-it's fitten for you, after the way you've 
acted. i never see such an old ostrich for wanting to gobble everything 
and i a-trusting you all the time, like you was my own father. you ought 
to been ashamed of yourself to stand by and hear it saddled on to a lot 
of poor niggers, and you never say a word for 'em. it makes me feel 
ridiculous to think i was soft enough to believe that rubbage. cuss you, 
i can see now why you was so anxious to make up the deffisit-you wanted 
to get what money i'd got out of the nonesuch and one thing or another, 
and scoop it all!" 
the king says, timid, and still a-snuffling: 
"why, duke, it was you that said make up the deffisit; it warn't me." 
"dry up! i don't want to hear no more out of you!" says the duke. "and 
now you see what you got by it. they've got all their own money back, 
and all of ourn but a shekel or two besides. g'long to bed, and don't 
you deffersit me no more deffersits, long 's you live!" 
so the king sneaked into the wigwam and took to his bottle for comfort, 
and before long the duke tackled his bottle; and so in about a half an 
hour they was as thick as thieves again, and the tighter they got the 
lovinger they got, and went off a-snoring in each other's arms. they 
both got powerful mellow, but i noticed the king didn't get mellow enough 
to forget to remember to not deny about hiding the money-bag again. that 
made me feel easy and satisfied. of course when they got to snoring we 
had a long gabble, and i told jim everything. 
chapter xxxi. 
we dasn't stop again at any town for days and days; kept right along down 
the river. we was down south in the warm weather now, and a mighty long 
ways from home. we begun to come to trees with spanish moss on them, 
hanging down from the limbs like long, gray beards. it was the first i 
ever see it growing, and it made the woods look solemn and dismal. so 
now the frauds reckoned they was out of danger, and they begun to work 
the villages again. 
first they done a lecture on temperance; but they didn't make enough for 
them both to get drunk on. then in another village they started a 
dancing-school; but they didn't know no more how to dance than a kangaroo 
does; so the first prance they made the general public jumped in and 
pranced them out of town. another time they tried to go at yellocution; 
but they didn't yellocute long till the audience got up and give them a 
solid good cussing, and made them skip out. they tackled missionarying, 
and mesmerizing, and doctoring, and telling fortunes, and a little of 
everything; but they couldn't seem to have no luck. so at last they got 
just about dead broke, and laid around the raft as she floated along, 
thinking and thinking, and never saying nothing, by the half a day at a 
time, and dreadful blue and desperate. 
and at last they took a change and begun to lay their heads together in 
the wigwam and talk low and confidential two or three hours at a time. 
jim and me got uneasy. we didn't like the look of it. we judged they 
was studying up some kind of worse deviltry than ever. we turned it over 
and over, and at last we made up our minds they was going to break into 
somebody's house or store, or was going into the counterfeit-money 
business, or something. so then we was pretty scared, and made up an 
agreement that we wouldn't have nothing in the world to do with such 
actions, and if we ever got the least show we would give them the cold 
shake and clear out and leave them behind. well, early one morning we hid 
the raft in a good, safe place about two mile below a little bit of a 
shabby village named pikesville, and the king he went ashore and told us 
all to stay hid whilst he went up to town and smelt around to see if 
anybody had got any wind of the royal nonesuch there yet. ("house to rob, 
you mean," says i to myself; "and when you get through robbing it you'll 
come back here and wonder what has become of me and jim and the raft-and 
you'll have to take it out in wondering.") and he said if he warn't back 
by midday the duke and me would know it was all right, and we was to come 
along. 
so we stayed where we was. the duke he fretted and sweated around, and 
was in a mighty sour way. he scolded us for everything, and we couldn't 
seem to do nothing right; he found fault with every little thing. 
something was a-brewing, sure. i was good and glad when midday come and 
no king; we could have a change, anyway-and maybe a chance for the 
chance on top of it. so me and the duke went up to the village, and 
hunted around there for the king, and by and by we found him in the back 
room of a little low doggery, very tight, and a lot of loafers 
bullyragging him for sport, and he a-cussing and a-threatening with all 
his might, and so tight he couldn't walk, and couldn't do nothing to 
them. the duke he begun to abuse him for an old fool, and the king begun 
to sass back, and the minute they was fairly at it i lit out and shook 
the reefs out of my hind legs, and spun down the river road like a deer, 
for i see our chance; and i made up my mind that it would be a long day 
before they ever see me and jim again. i got down there all out of 
breath but loaded up with joy, and sung out: 
"set her loose, jim! we're all right now!" 
but there warn't no answer, and nobody come out of the wigwam. jim was 
gone! i set up a shout-and then another-and then another one; and run 
this way and that in the woods, whooping and screeching; but it warn't no 
use-old jim was gone. then i set down and cried; i couldn't help it. 
but i couldn't set still long. pretty soon i went out on the road, 
trying to think what i better do, and i run across a boy walking, and 
asked him if he'd seen a strange nigger dressed so and so, and he says: 
"yes." 
"whereabouts?" says i. 
"down to silas phelps' place, two mile below here. he's a runaway 
nigger, and they've got him. was you looking for him?" 
"you bet i ain't! i run across him in the woods about an hour or two 
ago, and he said if i hollered he'd cut my livers out-and told me to lay 
down and stay where i was; and i done it. been there ever since; afeard 
to come out." 
"well," he says, "you needn't be afeard no more, becuz they've got him. 
he run off f'm down south, som'ers." 
"it's a good job they got him." 
"well, i reckon! there's two hunderd dollars reward on him. it's like 
picking up money out'n the road." 
"yes, it is-and i could a had it if i'd been big enough; i see him 
first. who nailed him?" 
"it was an old fellow-a stranger-and he sold out his chance in him for 
forty dollars, becuz he's got to go up the river and can't wait. think 
o' that, now! you bet i'd wait, if it was seven year." 
"that's me, every time," says i. "but maybe his chance ain't worth no 
more than that, if he'll sell it so cheap. maybe there's something ain't 
straight about it." 
"but it is, though-straight as a string. i see the handbill myself. it 
tells all about him, to a dot-paints him like a picture, and tells the 
plantation he's frum, below newrleans. no-sirree-bob, they ain't no 
trouble 'bout that speculation, you bet you. say, gimme a chaw tobacker, 
won't ye?" 
i didn't have none, so he left. i went to the raft, and set down in the 
wigwam to think. but i couldn't come to nothing. i thought till i wore 
my head sore, but i couldn't see no way out of the trouble. after all 
this long journey, and after all we'd done for them scoundrels, here it 
was all come to nothing, everything all busted up and ruined, because 
they could have the heart to serve jim such a trick as that, and make him 
a slave again all his life, and amongst strangers, too, for forty dirty 
dollars. 
once i said to myself it would be a thousand times better for jim to be a 
slave at home where his family was, as long as he'd got to be a slave, 
and so i'd better write a letter to tom sawyer and tell him to tell miss 
watson where he was. but i soon give up that notion for two things: 
she'd be mad and disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness for 
leaving her, and so she'd sell him straight down the river again; and if 
she didn't, everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger, and they'd 
make jim feel it all the time, and so he'd feel ornery and disgraced. 
and then think of me! it would get all around that huck finn helped a 
nigger to get his freedom; and if i was ever to see anybody from that 
town again i'd be ready to get down and lick his boots for shame. that's 
just the way: a person does a low-down thing, and then he don't want to 
take no consequences of it. thinks as long as he can hide, it ain't no 
disgrace. that was my fix exactly. the more i studied about this the 
more my conscience went to grinding me, and the more wicked and low-down 
and ornery i got to feeling. and at last, when it hit me all of a sudden 
that here was the plain hand of providence slapping me in the face and 
letting me know my wickedness was being watched all the time from up 
there in heaven, whilst i was stealing a poor old woman's nigger that 
hadn't ever done me no harm, and now was showing me there's one that's 
always on the lookout, and ain't a-going to allow no such miserable 
doings to go only just so fur and no further, i most dropped in my tracks 
i was so scared. well, i tried the best i could to kinder soften it up 
somehow for myself by saying i was brung up wicked, and so i warn't so 
much to blame; but something inside of me kept saying, "there was the 
sunday-school, you could a gone to it; and if you'd a done it they'd a 
learnt you there that people that acts as i'd been acting about that 
nigger goes to everlasting fire." 
it made me shiver. and i about made up my mind to pray, and see if i 
couldn't try to quit being the kind of a boy i was and be better. so i 
kneeled down. but the words wouldn't come. why wouldn't they? it 
warn't no use to try and hide it from him. nor from me, neither. i 
knowed very well why they wouldn't come. it was because my heart warn't 
right; it was because i warn't square; it was because i was playing 
double. i was letting on to give up sin, but away inside of me i was 
holding on to the biggest one of all. i was trying to make my mouth say 
i would do the right thing and the clean thing, and go and write to that 
nigger's owner and tell where he was; but deep down in me i knowed it was 
a lie, and he knowed it. you can't pray a lie-i found that out. 
so i was full of trouble, full as i could be; and didn't know what to do. 
at last i had an idea; and i says, i'll go and write the letter-and then 
see if i can pray. why, it was astonishing, the way i felt as light as a 
feather right straight off, and my troubles all gone. so i got a piece 
of paper and a pencil, all glad and excited, and set down and wrote: 
miss watson, your runaway nigger jim is down here two mile below 
pikesville, and mr. phelps has got him and he will give him up for the 
reward if you send. 
huck finn. 
i felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time i had ever 
felt so in my life, and i knowed i could pray now. but i didn't do it 
straight off, but laid the paper down and set there thinking-thinking 
how good it was all this happened so, and how near i come to being lost 
and going to hell. and went on thinking. and got to thinking over our 
trip down the river; and i see jim before me all the time: in the day 
and in the night-time, sometimes moonlight, sometimes storms, and we 
a-floating along, talking and singing and laughing. but somehow i 
couldn't seem to strike no places to harden me against him, but only the 
other kind. i'd see him standing my watch on top of his'n, 'stead of 
calling me, so i could go on sleeping; and see him how glad he was when i 
come back out of the fog; and when i come to him again in the swamp, up 
there where the feud was; and such-like times; and would always call me 
honey, and pet me and do everything he could think of for me, and how 
good he always was; and at last i struck the time i saved him by telling 
the men we had small-pox aboard, and he was so grateful, and said i was 
the best friend old jim ever had in the world, and the only one he's got 
now; and then i happened to look around and see that paper. 
it was a close place. i took it up, and held it in my hand. i was 
a-trembling, because i'd got to decide, forever, betwixt two things, and 
i knowed it. i studied a minute, sort of holding my breath, and then 
says to myself: 
"all right, then, i'll go to hell"-and tore it up. 
it was awful thoughts and awful words, but they was said. and i let them 
stay said; and never thought no more about reforming. i shoved the whole 
thing out of my head, and said i would take up wickedness again, which 
was in my line, being brung up to it, and the other warn't. and for a 
starter i would go to work and steal jim out of slavery again; and if i 
could think up anything worse, i would do that, too; because as long as i 
was in, and in for good, i might as well go the whole hog. 
then i set to thinking over how to get at it, and turned over some 
considerable many ways in my mind; and at last fixed up a plan that 
suited me. so then i took the bearings of a woody island that was down 
the river a piece, and as soon as it was fairly dark i crept out with my 
raft and went for it, and hid it there, and then turned in. i slept the 
night through, and got up before it was light, and had my breakfast, and 
put on my store clothes, and tied up some others and one thing or another 
in a bundle, and took the canoe and cleared for shore. i landed below 
where i judged was phelps's place, and hid my bundle in the woods, and 
then filled up the canoe with water, and loaded rocks into her and sunk 
her where i could find her again when i wanted her, about a quarter of a 
mile below a little steam sawmill that was on the bank. 
then i struck up the road, and when i passed the mill i see a sign on it, 
"phelps's sawmill," and when i come to the farm-houses, two or three 
hundred yards further along, i kept my eyes peeled, but didn't see nobody 
around, though it was good daylight now. but i didn't mind, because i 
didn't want to see nobody just yet-i only wanted to get the lay of the 
land. according to my plan, i was going to turn up there from the 
village, not from below. so i just took a look, and shoved along, 
straight for town. well, the very first man i see when i got there was 
the duke. he was sticking up a bill for the royal nonesuch-three-night 
performance-like that other time. they had the cheek, them frauds! i 
was right on him before i could shirk. he looked astonished, and says: 
"hel-lo! where'd you come from?" then he says, kind of glad and eager, 
"where's the raft?-got her in a good place?" 
i says: 
"why, that's just what i was going to ask your grace." 
then he didn't look so joyful, and says: 
"what was your idea for asking me?" he says. 
"well," i says, "when i see the king in that doggery yesterday i says to 
myself, we can't get him home for hours, till he's soberer; so i went 
a-loafing around town to put in the time and wait. a man up and offered 
me ten cents to help him pull a skiff over the river and back to fetch a 
sheep, and so i went along; but when we was dragging him to the boat, and 
the man left me a-holt of the rope and went behind him to shove him 
along, he was too strong for me and jerked loose and run, and we after 
him. we didn't have no dog, and so we had to chase him all over the 
country till we tired him out. we never got him till dark; then we 
fetched him over, and i started down for the raft. when i got there and 
see it was gone, i says to myself, 'they've got into trouble and had to 
leave; and they've took my nigger, which is the only nigger i've got in 
the world, and now i'm in a strange country, and ain't got no property no 
more, nor nothing, and no way to make my living;' so i set down and 
cried. i slept in the woods all night. but what did become of the raft, 
then?-and jim-poor jim!" 
"blamed if i know-that is, what's become of the raft. that old fool had 
made a trade and got forty dollars, and when we found him in the doggery 
the loafers had matched half-dollars with him and got every cent but what 
he'd spent for whisky; and when i got him home late last night and found 
the raft gone, we said, 'that little rascal has stole our raft and shook 
us, and run off down the river.'" 
"i wouldn't shake my nigger, would i?-the only nigger i had in the 
world, and the only property." 
"we never thought of that. fact is, i reckon we'd come to consider him 
our nigger; yes, we did consider him so-goodness knows we had trouble 
enough for him. so when we see the raft was gone and we flat broke, 
there warn't anything for it but to try the royal nonesuch another shake. 
and i've pegged along ever since, dry as a powder-horn. where's that ten 
cents? give it here." 
i had considerable money, so i give him ten cents, but begged him to 
spend it for something to eat, and give me some, because it was all the 
money i had, and i hadn't had nothing to eat since yesterday. he never 
said nothing. the next minute he whirls on me and says: 
"do you reckon that nigger would blow on us? we'd skin him if he done 
that!" 
"how can he blow? hain't he run off?" 
"no! that old fool sold him, and never divided with me, and the money's 
gone." 
"sold him?" i says, and begun to cry; "why, he was my nigger, and that 
was my money. where is he?-i want my nigger." 
"well, you can't get your nigger, that's all-so dry up your blubbering. 
looky here-do you think you'd venture to blow on us? blamed if i think 
i'd trust you. why, if you was to blow on us-" 
he stopped, but i never see the duke look so ugly out of his eyes before. 
i went on a-whimpering, and says: 
"i don't want to blow on nobody; and i ain't got no time to blow, nohow. 
i got to turn out and find my nigger." 
he looked kinder bothered, and stood there with his bills fluttering on 
his arm, thinking, and wrinkling up his forehead. at last he says: 
"i'll tell you something. we got to be here three days. if you'll 
promise you won't blow, and won't let the nigger blow, i'll tell you 
where to find him." 
so i promised, and he says: 
"a farmer by the name of silas ph-" and then he stopped. you see, he 
started to tell me the truth; but when he stopped that way, and begun to 
study and think again, i reckoned he was changing his mind. and so he 
was. he wouldn't trust me; he wanted to make sure of having me out of the 
way the whole three days. so pretty soon he says: 
"the man that bought him is named abram foster-abram g. foster-and he 
lives forty mile back here in the country, on the road to lafayette." 
"all right," i says, "i can walk it in three days. and i'll start this 
very afternoon." 
"no you wont, you'll start now; and don't you lose any time about it, 
neither, nor do any gabbling by the way. just keep a tight tongue in 
your head and move right along, and then you won't get into trouble with 
us, d'ye hear?" 
that was the order i wanted, and that was the one i played for. i wanted 
to be left free to work my plans. 
"so clear out," he says; "and you can tell mr. foster whatever you want 
to. maybe you can get him to believe that jim is your nigger-some idiots 
don't require documents-leastways i've heard there's such down south 
here. and when you tell him the handbill and the reward's bogus, maybe 
he'll believe you when you explain to him what the idea was for getting 
'em out. go 'long now, and tell him anything you want to; but mind you 
don't work your jaw any between here and there." 
so i left, and struck for the back country. i didn't look around, but i 
kinder felt like he was watching me. but i knowed i could tire him out 
at that. i went straight out in the country as much as a mile before i 
stopped; then i doubled back through the woods towards phelps'. i 
reckoned i better start in on my plan straight off without fooling 
around, because i wanted to stop jim's mouth till these fellows could get 
away. i didn't want no trouble with their kind. i'd seen all i wanted 
to of them, and wanted to get entirely shut of them. 
chapter xxxii. 
when i got there it was all still and sunday-like, and hot and sunshiny; 
the hands was gone to the fields; and there was them kind of faint 
dronings of bugs and flies in the air that makes it seem so lonesome and 
like everybody's dead and gone; and if a breeze fans along and quivers 
the leaves it makes you feel mournful, because you feel like it's spirits 
whispering-spirits that's been dead ever so many years-and you always 
think they're talking about you. as a general thing it makes a body wish 
he was dead, too, and done with it all. 
phelps' was one of these little one-horse cotton plantations, and they 
all look alike. a rail fence round a two-acre yard; a stile made out of 
logs sawed off and up-ended in steps, like barrels of a different length, 
to climb over the fence with, and for the women to stand on when they are 
going to jump on to a horse; some sickly grass-patches in the big yard, 
but mostly it was bare and smooth, like an old hat with the nap rubbed 
off; big double log-house for the white folks-hewed logs, with the 
chinks stopped up with mud or mortar, and these mud-stripes been 
whitewashed some time or another; round-log kitchen, with a big broad, 
open but roofed passage joining it to the house; log smoke-house back of 
the kitchen; three little log nigger-cabins in a row t'other side the 
smoke-house; one little hut all by itself away down against the back 
fence, and some outbuildings down a piece the other side; ash-hopper and 
big kettle to bile soap in by the little hut; bench by the kitchen door, 
with bucket of water and a gourd; hound asleep there in the sun; more 
hounds asleep round about; about three shade trees away off in a corner; 
some currant bushes and gooseberry bushes in one place by the fence; 
outside of the fence a garden and a watermelon patch; then the cotton 
fields begins, and after the fields the woods. 
i went around and clumb over the back stile by the ash-hopper, and 
started for the kitchen. when i got a little ways i heard the dim hum of 
a spinning-wheel wailing along up and sinking along down again; and then 
i knowed for certain i wished i was dead-for that is the lonesomest 
sound in the whole world. 
i went right along, not fixing up any particular plan, but just trusting 
to providence to put the right words in my mouth when the time come; for 
i'd noticed that providence always did put the right words in my mouth if 
i left it alone. 
when i got half-way, first one hound and then another got up and went for 
me, and of course i stopped and faced them, and kept still. and such 
another powwow as they made! in a quarter of a minute i was a kind of a 
hub of a wheel, as you may say-spokes made out of dogs-circle of 
fifteen of them packed together around me, with their necks and noses 
stretched up towards me, a-barking and howling; and more a-coming; you 
could see them sailing over fences and around corners from everywheres. 
a nigger woman come tearing out of the kitchen with a rolling-pin in her 
hand, singing out, "begone you tige! you spot! begone sah!" and she 
fetched first one and then another of them a clip and sent them howling, 
and then the rest followed; and the next second half of them come back, 
wagging their tails around me, and making friends with me. there ain't 
no harm in a hound, nohow. 
and behind the woman comes a little nigger girl and two little nigger 
boys without anything on but tow-linen shirts, and they hung on to their 
mother's gown, and peeped out from behind her at me, bashful, the way 
they always do. and here comes the white woman running from the house, 
about forty-five or fifty year old, bareheaded, and her spinning-stick in 
her hand; and behind her comes her little white children, acting the same 
way the little niggers was going. she was smiling all over so she could 
hardly stand-and says: 
"it's you, at last!-ain't it?" 
i out with a "yes'm" before i thought. 
she grabbed me and hugged me tight; and then gripped me by both hands and 
shook and shook; and the tears come in her eyes, and run down over; and 
she couldn't seem to hug and shake enough, and kept saying, "you don't 
look as much like your mother as i reckoned you would; but law sakes, i 
don't care for that, i'm so glad to see you! dear, dear, it does seem 
like i could eat you up! children, it's your cousin tom!-tell him 
howdy." 
but they ducked their heads, and put their fingers in their mouths, and 
hid behind her. so she run on: 
"lize, hurry up and get him a hot breakfast right away-or did you get 
your breakfast on the boat?" 
i said i had got it on the boat. so then she started for the house, 
leading me by the hand, and the children tagging after. when we got 
there she set me down in a split-bottomed chair, and set herself down on 
a little low stool in front of me, holding both of my hands, and says: 
"now i can have a good look at you; and, laws-a-me, i've been hungry for 
it a many and a many a time, all these long years, and it's come at last! 
we been expecting you a couple of days and more. what kep' you?-boat 
get aground?" 
"yes'm-she-" 
"don't say yes'm-say aunt sally. where'd she get aground?" 
i didn't rightly know what to say, because i didn't know whether the boat 
would be coming up the river or down. but i go a good deal on instinct; 
and my instinct said she would be coming up-from down towards orleans. 
that didn't help me much, though; for i didn't know the names of bars 
down that way. i see i'd got to invent a bar, or forget the name of the 
one we got aground on-or-now i struck an idea, and fetched it out: 
"it warn't the grounding-that didn't keep us back but a little. we 
blowed out a cylinder-head." 
"good gracious! anybody hurt?" 
"no'm. killed a nigger." 
"well, it's lucky; because sometimes people do get hurt. two years ago 
last christmas your uncle silas was coming up from newrleans on the old 
lally rook, and she blowed out a cylinder-head and crippled a man. and i 
think he died afterwards. he was a baptist. your uncle silas knowed a 
family in baton rouge that knowed his people very well. yes, i remember 
now, he did die. mortification set in, and they had to amputate him. 
but it didn't save him. yes, it was mortification-that was it. he 
turned blue all over, and died in the hope of a glorious resurrection. 
they say he was a sight to look at. your uncle's been up to the town 
every day to fetch you. and he's gone again, not more'n an hour ago; 
he'll be back any minute now. you must a met him on the road, didn't 
you?-oldish man, with a-" 
"no, i didn't see nobody, aunt sally. the boat landed just at daylight, 
and i left my baggage on the wharf-boat and went looking around the town 
and out a piece in the country, to put in the time and not get here too 
soon; and so i come down the back way." 
"who'd you give the baggage to?" 
"nobody." 
"why, child, it 'll be stole!" 
"not where i hid it i reckon it won't," i says. 
"how'd you get your breakfast so early on the boat?" 
it was kinder thin ice, but i says: 
"the captain see me standing around, and told me i better have something 
to eat before i went ashore; so he took me in the texas to the officers' 
lunch, and give me all i wanted." 
i was getting so uneasy i couldn't listen good. i had my mind on the 
children all the time; i wanted to get them out to one side and pump them 
a little, and find out who i was. but i couldn't get no show, mrs. 
phelps kept it up and run on so. pretty soon she made the cold chills 
streak all down my back, because she says: 
"but here we're a-running on this way, and you hain't told me a word 
about sis, nor any of them. now i'll rest my works a little, and you 
start up yourn; just tell me everything-tell me all about 'm all every 
one of 'm; and how they are, and what they're doing, and what they told 
you to tell me; and every last thing you can think of." 
well, i see i was up a stump-and up it good. providence had stood by me 
this fur all right, but i was hard and tight aground now. i see it 
warn't a bit of use to try to go ahead-i'd got to throw up my hand. so 
i says to myself, here's another place where i got to resk the truth. i 
opened my mouth to begin; but she grabbed me and hustled me in behind the 
bed, and says: 
"here he comes! stick your head down lower-there, that'll do; you can't 
be seen now. don't you let on you're here. i'll play a joke on him. 
children, don't you say a word." 
i see i was in a fix now. but it warn't no use to worry; there warn't 
nothing to do but just hold still, and try and be ready to stand from 
under when the lightning struck. 
i had just one little glimpse of the old gentleman when he come in; then 
the bed hid him. mrs. phelps she jumps for him, and says: 
"has he come?" 
"no," says her husband. 
"good-ness gracious!" she says, "what in the warld can have become of 
him?" 
"i can't imagine," says the old gentleman; "and i must say it makes me 
dreadful uneasy." 
"uneasy!" she says; "i'm ready to go distracted! he must a come; and 
you've missed him along the road. i know it's so-something tells me 
so." 
"why, sally, i couldn't miss him along the road-you know that." 
"but oh, dear, dear, what will sis say! he must a come! you must a 
missed him. he-" 
"oh, don't distress me any more'n i'm already distressed. i don't know 
what in the world to make of it. i'm at my wit's end, and i don't mind 
acknowledging 't i'm right down scared. but there's no hope that he's 
come; for he couldn't come and me miss him. sally, it's terrible-just 
terrible-something's happened to the boat, sure!" 
"why, silas! look yonder!-up the road!-ain't that somebody coming?" 
he sprung to the window at the head of the bed, and that give mrs. phelps 
the chance she wanted. she stooped down quick at the foot of the bed and 
give me a pull, and out i come; and when he turned back from the window 
there she stood, a-beaming and a-smiling like a house afire, and i 
standing pretty meek and sweaty alongside. the old gentleman stared, and 
says: 
"why, who's that?" 
"who do you reckon 't is?" 
"i hain't no idea. who is it?" 
"it's tom sawyer!" 
by jings, i most slumped through the floor! but there warn't no time to 
swap knives; the old man grabbed me by the hand and shook, and kept on 
shaking; and all the time how the woman did dance around and laugh and 
cry; and then how they both did fire off questions about sid, and mary, 
and the rest of the tribe. 
but if they was joyful, it warn't nothing to what i was; for it was like 
being born again, i was so glad to find out who i was. well, they froze 
to me for two hours; and at last, when my chin was so tired it couldn't 
hardly go any more, i had told them more about my family-i mean the 
sawyer family-than ever happened to any six sawyer families. and i 
explained all about how we blowed out a cylinder-head at the mouth of 
white river, and it took us three days to fix it. which was all right, 
and worked first-rate; because they didn't know but what it would take 
three days to fix it. if i'd a called it a bolthead it would a done just 
as well. 
now i was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side, and pretty 
uncomfortable all up the other. being tom sawyer was easy and 
comfortable, and it stayed easy and comfortable till by and by i hear a 
steamboat coughing along down the river. then i says to myself, s'pose 
tom sawyer comes down on that boat? and s'pose he steps in here any 
minute, and sings out my name before i can throw him a wink to keep 
quiet? 
well, i couldn't have it that way; it wouldn't do at all. i must go up 
the road and waylay him. so i told the folks i reckoned i would go up to 
the town and fetch down my baggage. the old gentleman was for going 
along with me, but i said no, i could drive the horse myself, and i 
druther he wouldn't take no trouble about me. 
chapter xxxiii. 
so i started for town in the wagon, and when i was half-way i see a wagon 
coming, and sure enough it was tom sawyer, and i stopped and waited till 
he come along. i says "hold on!" and it stopped alongside, and his mouth 
opened up like a trunk, and stayed so; and he swallowed two or three 
times like a person that's got a dry throat, and then says: 
"i hain't ever done you no harm. you know that. so, then, what you want 
to come back and ha'nt me for?" 
i says: 
"i hain't come back-i hain't been gone." 
when he heard my voice it righted him up some, but he warn't quite 
satisfied yet. he says: 
"don't you play nothing on me, because i wouldn't on you. honest injun, 
you ain't a ghost?" 
"honest injun, i ain't," i says. 
"well-i-i-well, that ought to settle it, of course; but i can't 
somehow seem to understand it no way. looky here, warn't you ever 
murdered at all?" 
"no. i warn't ever murdered at all-i played it on them. you come in 
here and feel of me if you don't believe me." 
so he done it; and it satisfied him; and he was that glad to see me again 
he didn't know what to do. and he wanted to know all about it right off, 
because it was a grand adventure, and mysterious, and so it hit him where 
he lived. but i said, leave it alone till by and by; and told his driver 
to wait, and we drove off a little piece, and i told him the kind of a 
fix i was in, and what did he reckon we better do? he said, let him 
alone a minute, and don't disturb him. so he thought and thought, and 
pretty soon he says: 
"it's all right; i've got it. take my trunk in your wagon, and let on 
it's your'n; and you turn back and fool along slow, so as to get to the 
house about the time you ought to; and i'll go towards town a piece, and 
take a fresh start, and get there a quarter or a half an hour after you; 
and you needn't let on to know me at first." 
i says: 
"all right; but wait a minute. there's one more thing-a thing that 
nobody don't know but me. and that is, there's a nigger here that i'm 
a-trying to steal out of slavery, and his name is jim-old miss watson's 
jim." 
he says: 
"what! why, jim is-" 
he stopped and went to studying. i says: 
"i know what you'll say. you'll say it's dirty, low-down business; but 
what if it is? i'm low down; and i'm a-going to steal him, and i want 
you keep mum and not let on. will you?" 
his eye lit up, and he says: 
"i'll help you steal him!" 
well, i let go all holts then, like i was shot. it was the most 
astonishing speech i ever heard-and i'm bound to say tom sawyer fell 
considerable in my estimation. only i couldn't believe it. tom sawyer a 
nigger-stealer! 
"oh, shucks!" i says; "you're joking." 
"i ain't joking, either." 
"well, then," i says, "joking or no joking, if you hear anything said 
about a runaway nigger, don't forget to remember that you don't know 
nothing about him, and i don't know nothing about him." 
then we took the trunk and put it in my wagon, and he drove off his way 
and i drove mine. but of course i forgot all about driving slow on 
accounts of being glad and full of thinking; so i got home a heap too 
quick for that length of a trip. the old gentleman was at the door, and 
he says: 
"why, this is wonderful! whoever would a thought it was in that mare to 
do it? i wish we'd a timed her. and she hain't sweated a hair-not a 
hair. it's wonderful. why, i wouldn't take a hundred dollars for that 
horse now-i wouldn't, honest; and yet i'd a sold her for fifteen 
before, and thought 'twas all she was worth." 
that's all he said. he was the innocentest, best old soul i ever see. 
but it warn't surprising; because he warn't only just a farmer, he was a 
preacher, too, and had a little one-horse log church down back of the 
plantation, which he built it himself at his own expense, for a church 
and schoolhouse, and never charged nothing for his preaching, and it was 
worth it, too. there was plenty other farmer-preachers like that, and 
done the same way, down south. 
in about half an hour tom's wagon drove up to the front stile, and aunt 
sally she see it through the window, because it was only about fifty 
yards, and says: 
"why, there's somebody come! i wonder who 'tis? why, i do believe it's 
a stranger. jimmy" (that's one of the children) "run and tell lize to 
put on another plate for dinner." 
everybody made a rush for the front door, because, of course, a stranger 
don't come every year, and so he lays over the yaller-fever, for 
interest, when he does come. tom was over the stile and starting for the 
house; the wagon was spinning up the road for the village, and we was all 
bunched in the front door. tom had his store clothes on, and an 
audience-and that was always nuts for tom sawyer. in them circumstances 
it warn't no trouble to him to throw in an amount of style that was 
suitable. he warn't a boy to meeky along up that yard like a sheep; no, 
he come ca'm and important, like the ram. when he got a-front of us he 
lifts his hat ever so gracious and dainty, like it was the lid of a box 
that had butterflies asleep in it and he didn't want to disturb them, and 
says: 
"mr. archibald nichols, i presume?" 
"no, my boy," says the old gentleman, "i'm sorry to say 't your driver 
has deceived you; nichols's place is down a matter of three mile more. 
come in, come in." 
tom he took a look back over his shoulder, and says, "too late-he's out 
of sight." 
"yes, he's gone, my son, and you must come in and eat your dinner with 
us; and then we'll hitch up and take you down to nichols's." 
"oh, i can't make you so much trouble; i couldn't think of it. i'll walk 
i don't mind the distance." 
"but we won't let you walk-it wouldn't be southern hospitality to do it. 
come right in." 
"oh, do," says aunt sally; "it ain't a bit of trouble to us, not a bit in 
the world. you must stay. it's a long, dusty three mile, and we can't 
let you walk. and, besides, i've already told 'em to put on another 
plate when i see you coming; so you mustn't disappoint us. come right in 
and make yourself at home." 
so tom he thanked them very hearty and handsome, and let himself be 
persuaded, and come in; and when he was in he said he was a stranger from 
hicksville, ohio, and his name was william thompson-and he made another 
bow. 
well, he run on, and on, and on, making up stuff about hicksville and 
everybody in it he could invent, and i getting a little nervious, and 
wondering how this was going to help me out of my scrape; and at last, 
still talking along, he reached over and kissed aunt sally right on the 
mouth, and then settled back again in his chair comfortable, and was 
going on talking; but she jumped up and wiped it off with the back of her 
hand, and says: 
"you owdacious puppy!" 
he looked kind of hurt, and says: 
"i'm surprised at you, m'am." 
"you're s'rp-why, what do you reckon i am? i've a good notion to take 
and-say, what do you mean by kissing me?" 
he looked kind of humble, and says: 
"i didn't mean nothing, m'am. i didn't mean no harm. i-i-thought 
you'd like it." 
"why, you born fool!" she took up the spinning stick, and it looked like 
it was all she could do to keep from giving him a crack with it. "what 
made you think i'd like it?" 
"well, i don't know. only, they-they-told me you would." 
"they told you i would. whoever told you's another lunatic. i never 
heard the beat of it. who's they?" 
"why, everybody. they all said so, m'am." 
it was all she could do to hold in; and her eyes snapped, and her fingers 
worked like she wanted to scratch him; and she says: 
"who's 'everybody'? out with their names, or ther'll be an idiot short." 
he got up and looked distressed, and fumbled his hat, and says: 
"i'm sorry, and i warn't expecting it. they told me to. they all told 
me to. they all said, kiss her; and said she'd like it. they all said 
it-every one of them. but i'm sorry, m'am, and i won't do it no more 
i won't, honest." 
"you won't, won't you? well, i sh'd reckon you won't!" 
"no'm, i'm honest about it; i won't ever do it again-till you ask me." 
"till i ask you! well, i never see the beat of it in my born days! i 
lay you'll be the methusalem-numskull of creation before ever i ask you 
or the likes of you." 
"well," he says, "it does surprise me so. i can't make it out, somehow. 
they said you would, and i thought you would. but-" he stopped and 
looked around slow, like he wished he could run across a friendly eye 
somewheres, and fetched up on the old gentleman's, and says, "didn't you 
think she'd like me to kiss her, sir?" 
"why, no; i-i-well, no, i b'lieve i didn't." 
then he looks on around the same way to me, and says: 
"tom, didn't you think aunt sally 'd open out her arms and say, 'sid 
sawyer-'" 
"my land!" she says, breaking in and jumping for him, "you impudent young 
rascal, to fool a body so-" and was going to hug him, but he fended her 
off, and says: 
"no, not till you've asked me first." 
so she didn't lose no time, but asked him; and hugged him and kissed him 
over and over again, and then turned him over to the old man, and he took 
what was left. and after they got a little quiet again she says: 
"why, dear me, i never see such a surprise. we warn't looking for you at 
all, but only tom. sis never wrote to me about anybody coming but him." 
"it's because it warn't intended for any of us to come but tom," he says; 
"but i begged and begged, and at the last minute she let me come, too; 
so, coming down the river, me and tom thought it would be a first-rate 
surprise for him to come here to the house first, and for me to by and by 
tag along and drop in, and let on to be a stranger. but it was a 
mistake, aunt sally. this ain't no healthy place for a stranger to 
come." 
"no-not impudent whelps, sid. you ought to had your jaws boxed; i 
hain't been so put out since i don't know when. but i don't care, i 
don't mind the terms-i'd be willing to stand a thousand such jokes to 
have you here. well, to think of that performance! i don't deny it, i 
was most putrified with astonishment when you give me that smack." 
we had dinner out in that broad open passage betwixt the house and the 
kitchen; and there was things enough on that table for seven families 
and all hot, too; none of your flabby, tough meat that's laid in a 
cupboard in a damp cellar all night and tastes like a hunk of old cold 
cannibal in the morning. uncle silas he asked a pretty long blessing 
over it, but it was worth it; and it didn't cool it a bit, neither, the 
way i've seen them kind of interruptions do lots of times. there was a 
considerable good deal of talk all the afternoon, and me and tom was on 
the lookout all the time; but it warn't no use, they didn't happen to say 
nothing about any runaway nigger, and we was afraid to try to work up to 
it. but at supper, at night, one of the little boys says: 
"pa, mayn't tom and sid and me go to the show?" 
"no," says the old man, "i reckon there ain't going to be any; and you 
couldn't go if there was; because the runaway nigger told burton and me 
all about that scandalous show, and burton said he would tell the people; 
so i reckon they've drove the owdacious loafers out of town before this 
time." 
so there it was!-but i couldn't help it. tom and me was to sleep in the 
same room and bed; so, being tired, we bid good-night and went up to bed 
right after supper, and clumb out of the window and down the 
lightning-rod, and shoved for the town; for i didn't believe anybody was 
going to give the king and the duke a hint, and so if i didn't hurry up 
and give them one they'd get into trouble sure. 
on the road tom he told me all about how it was reckoned i was murdered, 
and how pap disappeared pretty soon, and didn't come back no more, and 
what a stir there was when jim run away; and i told tom all about our 
royal nonesuch rapscallions, and as much of the raft voyage as i had time 
to; and as we struck into the town and up through the-here comes a 
raging rush of people with torches, and an awful whooping and yelling, 
and banging tin pans and blowing horns; and we jumped to one side to let 
them go by; and as they went by i see they had the king and the duke 
astraddle of a rail-that is, i knowed it was the king and the duke, 
though they was all over tar and feathers, and didn't look like nothing 
in the world that was human-just looked like a couple of monstrous big 
soldier-plumes. well, it made me sick to see it; and i was sorry for 
them poor pitiful rascals, it seemed like i couldn't ever feel any 
hardness against them any more in the world. it was a dreadful thing to 
see. human beings can be awful cruel to one another. 
we see we was too late-couldn't do no good. we asked some stragglers 
about it, and they said everybody went to the show looking very innocent; 
and laid low and kept dark till the poor old king was in the middle of 
his cavortings on the stage; then somebody give a signal, and the house 
rose up and went for them. 
so we poked along back home, and i warn't feeling so brash as i was 
before, but kind of ornery, and humble, and to blame, somehow-though i 
hadn't done nothing. but that's always the way; it don't make no 
difference whether you do right or wrong, a person's conscience ain't got 
no sense, and just goes for him anyway. if i had a yaller dog that 
didn't know no more than a person's conscience does i would pison him. 
it takes up more room than all the rest of a person's insides, and yet 
ain't no good, nohow. tom sawyer he says the same. 
chapter xxxiv. 
we stopped talking, and got to thinking. by and by tom says: 
"looky here, huck, what fools we are to not think of it before! i bet i 
know where jim is." 
"no! where?" 
"in that hut down by the ash-hopper. why, looky here. when we was at 
dinner, didn't you see a nigger man go in there with some vittles?" 
"yes." 
"what did you think the vittles was for?" 
"for a dog." 
"so 'd i. well, it wasn't for a dog." 
"why?" 
"because part of it was watermelon." 
"so it was-i noticed it. well, it does beat all that i never thought 
about a dog not eating watermelon. it shows how a body can see and don't 
see at the same time." 
"well, the nigger unlocked the padlock when he went in, and he locked it 
again when he came out. he fetched uncle a key about the time we got up 
from table-same key, i bet. watermelon shows man, lock shows prisoner; 
and it ain't likely there's two prisoners on such a little plantation, 
and where the people's all so kind and good. jim's the prisoner. all 
right-i'm glad we found it out detective fashion; i wouldn't give 
shucks for any other way. now you work your mind, and study out a plan 
to steal jim, and i will study out one, too; and we'll take the one we 
like the best." 
what a head for just a boy to have! if i had tom sawyer's head i 
wouldn't trade it off to be a duke, nor mate of a steamboat, nor clown in 
a circus, nor nothing i can think of. i went to thinking out a plan, but 
only just to be doing something; i knowed very well where the right plan 
was going to come from. pretty soon tom says: 
"ready?" 
"yes," i says. 
"all right-bring it out." 
"my plan is this," i says. "we can easy find out if it's jim in there. 
then get up my canoe to-morrow night, and fetch my raft over from the 
island. then the first dark night that comes steal the key out of the 
old man's britches after he goes to bed, and shove off down the river on 
the raft with jim, hiding daytimes and running nights, the way me and jim 
used to do before. wouldn't that plan work?" 
"work? why, cert'nly it would work, like rats a-fighting. but it's too 
blame' simple; there ain't nothing to it. what's the good of a plan that 
ain't no more trouble than that? it's as mild as goose-milk. why, huck, 
it wouldn't make no more talk than breaking into a soap factory." 
i never said nothing, because i warn't expecting nothing different; but i 
knowed mighty well that whenever he got his plan ready it wouldn't have 
none of them objections to it. 
and it didn't. he told me what it was, and i see in a minute it was 
worth fifteen of mine for style, and would make jim just as free a man as 
mine would, and maybe get us all killed besides. so i was satisfied, and 
said we would waltz in on it. i needn't tell what it was here, because i 
knowed it wouldn't stay the way, it was. i knowed he would be changing 
it around every which way as we went along, and heaving in new 
bullinesses wherever he got a chance. and that is what he done. 
well, one thing was dead sure, and that was that tom sawyer was in 
earnest, and was actuly going to help steal that nigger out of slavery. 
that was the thing that was too many for me. here was a boy that was 
respectable and well brung up; and had a character to lose; and folks at 
home that had characters; and he was bright and not leather-headed; and 
knowing and not ignorant; and not mean, but kind; and yet here he was, 
without any more pride, or rightness, or feeling, than to stoop to this 
business, and make himself a shame, and his family a shame, before 
everybody. i couldn't understand it no way at all. it was outrageous, 
and i knowed i ought to just up and tell him so; and so be his true 
friend, and let him quit the thing right where he was and save himself. 
and i did start to tell him; but he shut me up, and says: 
"don't you reckon i know what i'm about? don't i generly know what i'm 
about?" 
"yes." 
"didn't i say i was going to help steal the nigger?" 
"yes." 
"well, then." 
that's all he said, and that's all i said. it warn't no use to say any 
more; because when he said he'd do a thing, he always done it. but i 
couldn't make out how he was willing to go into this thing; so i just let 
it go, and never bothered no more about it. if he was bound to have it 
so, i couldn't help it. 
when we got home the house was all dark and still; so we went on down to 
the hut by the ash-hopper for to examine it. we went through the yard so 
as to see what the hounds would do. they knowed us, and didn't make no 
more noise than country dogs is always doing when anything comes by in 
the night. when we got to the cabin we took a look at the front and the 
two sides; and on the side i warn't acquainted with-which was the north 
side-we found a square window-hole, up tolerable high, with just one 
stout board nailed across it. i says: 
"here's the ticket. this hole's big enough for jim to get through if we 
wrench off the board." 
tom says: 
"it's as simple as tit-tat-toe, three-in-a-row, and as easy as playing 
hooky. i should hope we can find a way that's a little more complicated 
than that, huck finn." 
"well, then," i says, "how 'll it do to saw him out, the way i done 
before i was murdered that time?" 
"that's more like," he says. "it's real mysterious, and troublesome, and 
good," he says; "but i bet we can find a way that's twice as long. there 
ain't no hurry; le's keep on looking around." 
betwixt the hut and the fence, on the back side, was a lean-to that 
joined the hut at the eaves, and was made out of plank. it was as long 
as the hut, but narrow-only about six foot wide. the door to it was at 
the south end, and was padlocked. tom he went to the soap-kettle and 
searched around, and fetched back the iron thing they lift the lid with; 
so he took it and prized out one of the staples. the chain fell down, 
and we opened the door and went in, and shut it, and struck a match, and 
see the shed was only built against a cabin and hadn't no connection with 
it; and there warn't no floor to the shed, nor nothing in it but some old 
rusty played-out hoes and spades and picks and a crippled plow. the 
match went out, and so did we, and shoved in the staple again, and the 
door was locked as good as ever. tom was joyful. he says; 
"now we're all right. we'll dig him out. it 'll take about a week!" 
then we started for the house, and i went in the back door-you only have 
to pull a buckskin latch-string, they don't fasten the doors-but that 
warn't romantical enough for tom sawyer; no way would do him but he must 
climb up the lightning-rod. but after he got up half way about three 
times, and missed fire and fell every time, and the last time most busted 
his brains out, he thought he'd got to give it up; but after he was 
rested he allowed he would give her one more turn for luck, and this time 
he made the trip. 
in the morning we was up at break of day, and down to the nigger cabins 
to pet the dogs and make friends with the nigger that fed jim-if it was 
jim that was being fed. the niggers was just getting through breakfast 
and starting for the fields; and jim's nigger was piling up a tin pan 
with bread and meat and things; and whilst the others was leaving, the 
key come from the house. 
this nigger had a good-natured, chuckle-headed face, and his wool was all 
tied up in little bunches with thread. that was to keep witches off. he 
said the witches was pestering him awful these nights, and making him see 
all kinds of strange things, and hear all kinds of strange words and 
noises, and he didn't believe he was ever witched so long before in his 
life. he got so worked up, and got to running on so about his troubles, 
he forgot all about what he'd been a-going to do. so tom says: 
"what's the vittles for? going to feed the dogs?" 
the nigger kind of smiled around gradually over his face, like when you 
heave a brickbat in a mud-puddle, and he says: 
"yes, mars sid, a dog. cur'us dog, too. does you want to go en look at 
'im?" 
"yes." 
i hunched tom, and whispers: 
"you going, right here in the daybreak? that warn't the plan." 
"no, it warn't; but it's the plan now." 
so, drat him, we went along, but i didn't like it much. when we got in 
we couldn't hardly see anything, it was so dark; but jim was there, sure 
enough, and could see us; and he sings out: 
"why, huck! en good lan'! ain' dat misto tom?" 
i just knowed how it would be; i just expected it. i didn't know nothing 
to do; and if i had i couldn't a done it, because that nigger busted in 
and says: 
"why, de gracious sakes! do he know you genlmen?" 
we could see pretty well now. tom he looked at the nigger, steady and 
kind of wondering, and says: 
"does who know us?" 
"why, dis-yer runaway nigger." 
"i don't reckon he does; but what put that into your head?" 
"what put it dar? didn' he jis' dis minute sing out like he knowed you?" 
tom says, in a puzzled-up kind of way: 
"well, that's mighty curious. who sung out? when did he sing out? what 
did he sing out?" and turns to me, perfectly ca'm, and says, "did you 
hear anybody sing out?" 
of course there warn't nothing to be said but the one thing; so i says: 
"no; i ain't heard nobody say nothing." 
then he turns to jim, and looks him over like he never see him before, 
and says: 
"did you sing out?" 
"no, sah," says jim; "i hain't said nothing, sah." 
"not a word?" 
"no, sah, i hain't said a word." 
"did you ever see us before?" 
"no, sah; not as i knows on." 
so tom turns to the nigger, which was looking wild and distressed, and 
says, kind of severe: 
"what do you reckon's the matter with you, anyway? what made you think 
somebody sung out?" 
"oh, it's de dad-blame' witches, sah, en i wisht i was dead, i do. dey's 
awluz at it, sah, en dey do mos' kill me, dey sk'yers me so. please to 
don't tell nobody 'bout it sah, er ole mars silas he'll scole me; 'kase 
he say dey ain't no witches. i jis' wish to goodness he was heah now 
den what would he say! i jis' bet he couldn' fine no way to git aroun' 
it dis time. but it's awluz jis' so; people dat's sot, stays sot; dey 
won't look into noth'n'en fine it out f'r deyselves, en when you fine it 
out en tell um 'bout it, dey doan' b'lieve you." 
tom give him a dime, and said we wouldn't tell nobody; and told him to 
buy some more thread to tie up his wool with; and then looks at jim, and 
says: 
"i wonder if uncle silas is going to hang this nigger. if i was to catch 
a nigger that was ungrateful enough to run away, i wouldn't give him up, 
i'd hang him." and whilst the nigger stepped to the door to look at the 
dime and bite it to see if it was good, he whispers to jim and says: 
"don't ever let on to know us. and if you hear any digging going on 
nights, it's us; we're going to set you free." 
jim only had time to grab us by the hand and squeeze it; then the nigger 
come back, and we said we'd come again some time if the nigger wanted us 
to; and he said he would, more particular if it was dark, because the 
witches went for him mostly in the dark, and it was good to have folks 
around then. 
chapter xxxv. 
it would be most an hour yet till breakfast, so we left and struck down 
into the woods; because tom said we got to have some light to see how to 
dig by, and a lantern makes too much, and might get us into trouble; what 
we must have was a lot of them rotten chunks that's called fox-fire, and 
just makes a soft kind of a glow when you lay them in a dark place. we 
fetched an armful and hid it in the weeds, and set down to rest, and tom 
says, kind of dissatisfied: 
"blame it, this whole thing is just as easy and awkward as it can be. 
and so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan. there 
ain't no watchman to be drugged-now there ought to be a watchman. there 
ain't even a dog to give a sleeping-mixture to. and there's jim chained 
by one leg, with a ten-foot chain, to the leg of his bed: why, all you 
got to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off the chain. and uncle 
silas he trusts everybody; sends the key to the punkin-headed nigger, and 
don't send nobody to watch the nigger. jim could a got out of that 
window-hole before this, only there wouldn't be no use trying to travel 
with a ten-foot chain on his leg. why, drat it, huck, it's the stupidest 
arrangement i ever see. you got to invent all the difficulties. well, we 
can't help it; we got to do the best we can with the materials we've got. 
anyhow, there's one thing-there's more honor in getting him out 
through a lot of difficulties and dangers, where there warn't one of them 
furnished to you by the people who it was their duty to furnish them, and 
you had to contrive them all out of your own head. now look at just that 
one thing of the lantern. when you come down to the cold facts, we 
simply got to let on that a lantern's resky. why, we could work with a 
torchlight procession if we wanted to, i believe. now, whilst i think of 
it, we got to hunt up something to make a saw out of the first chance we 
get." 
"what do we want of a saw?" 
"what do we want of a saw? hain't we got to saw the leg of jim's bed 
off, so as to get the chain loose?" 
"why, you just said a body could lift up the bedstead and slip the chain 
off." 
"well, if that ain't just like you, huck finn. you can get up the 
infant-schooliest ways of going at a thing. why, hain't you ever read 
any books at all?-baron trenck, nor casanova, nor benvenuto chelleeny, 
nor henri iv., nor none of them heroes? who ever heard of getting a 
prisoner loose in such an old-maidy way as that? no; the way all the 
best authorities does is to saw the bed-leg in two, and leave it just so, 
and swallow the sawdust, so it can't be found, and put some dirt and 
grease around the sawed place so the very keenest seneskal can't see no 
sign of it's being sawed, and thinks the bed-leg is perfectly sound. 
then, the night you're ready, fetch the leg a kick, down she goes; slip 
off your chain, and there you are. nothing to do but hitch your rope 
ladder to the battlements, shin down it, break your leg in the moat 
because a rope ladder is nineteen foot too short, you know-and there's 
your horses and your trusty vassles, and they scoop you up and fling you 
across a saddle, and away you go to your native langudoc, or navarre, or 
wherever it is. it's gaudy, huck. i wish there was a moat to this cabin. 
if we get time, the night of the escape, we'll dig one." 
i says: 
"what do we want of a moat when we're going to snake him out from under 
the cabin?" 
but he never heard me. he had forgot me and everything else. he had his 
chin in his hand, thinking. pretty soon he sighs and shakes his head; 
then sighs again, and says: 
"no, it wouldn't do-there ain't necessity enough for it." 
"for what?" i says. 
"why, to saw jim's leg off," he says. 
"good land!" i says; "why, there ain't no necessity for it. and what 
would you want to saw his leg off for, anyway?" 
"well, some of the best authorities has done it. they couldn't get the 
chain off, so they just cut their hand off and shoved. and a leg would 
be better still. but we got to let that go. there ain't necessity 
enough in this case; and, besides, jim's a nigger, and wouldn't 
understand the reasons for it, and how it's the custom in europe; so 
we'll let it go. but there's one thing-he can have a rope ladder; we 
can tear up our sheets and make him a rope ladder easy enough. and we 
can send it to him in a pie; it's mostly done that way. and i've et 
worse pies." 
"why, tom sawyer, how you talk," i says; "jim ain't got no use for a rope 
ladder." 
"he has got use for it. how you talk, you better say; you don't know 
nothing about it. he's got to have a rope ladder; they all do." 
"what in the nation can he do with it?" 
"do with it? he can hide it in his bed, can't he? that's what they all 
do; and he's got to, too. huck, you don't ever seem to want to do 
anything that's regular; you want to be starting something fresh all the 
time. s'pose he don't do nothing with it? ain't it there in his bed, for 
a clew, after he's gone? and don't you reckon they'll want clews? of 
course they will. and you wouldn't leave them any? that would be a 
pretty howdy-do, wouldn't it! i never heard of such a thing." 
"well," i says, "if it's in the regulations, and he's got to have it, all 
right, let him have it; because i don't wish to go back on no 
regulations; but there's one thing, tom sawyer-if we go to tearing up 
our sheets to make jim a rope ladder, we're going to get into trouble 
with aunt sally, just as sure as you're born. now, the way i look at it, 
a hickry-bark ladder don't cost nothing, and don't waste nothing, and is 
just as good to load up a pie with, and hide in a straw tick, as any rag 
ladder you can start; and as for jim, he ain't had no experience, and so 
he don't care what kind of a-" 
"oh, shucks, huck finn, if i was as ignorant as you i'd keep still 
that's what i'd do. who ever heard of a state prisoner escaping by a 
hickry-bark ladder? why, it's perfectly ridiculous." 
"well, all right, tom, fix it your own way; but if you'll take my advice, 
you'll let me borrow a sheet off of the clothesline." 
he said that would do. and that gave him another idea, and he says: 
"borrow a shirt, too." 
"what do we want of a shirt, tom?" 
"want it for jim to keep a journal on." 
"journal your granny-jim can't write." 
"s'pose he can't write-he can make marks on the shirt, can't he, if we 
make him a pen out of an old pewter spoon or a piece of an old iron 
barrel-hoop?" 
"why, tom, we can pull a feather out of a goose and make him a better 
one; and quicker, too." 
"prisoners don't have geese running around the donjon-keep to pull pens 
out of, you muggins. they always make their pens out of the hardest, 
toughest, troublesomest piece of old brass candlestick or something like 
that they can get their hands on; and it takes them weeks and weeks and 
months and months to file it out, too, because they've got to do it by 
rubbing it on the wall. they wouldn't use a goose-quill if they had it. 
it ain't regular." 
"well, then, what'll we make him the ink out of?" 
"many makes it out of iron-rust and tears; but that's the common sort and 
women; the best authorities uses their own blood. jim can do that; and 
when he wants to send any little common ordinary mysterious message to 
let the world know where he's captivated, he can write it on the bottom 
of a tin plate with a fork and throw it out of the window. the iron mask 
always done that, and it's a blame' good way, too." 
"jim ain't got no tin plates. they feed him in a pan." 
"that ain't nothing; we can get him some." 
"can't nobody read his plates." 
"that ain't got anything to do with it, huck finn. all he's got to do is 
to write on the plate and throw it out. you don't have to be able to 
read it. why, half the time you can't read anything a prisoner writes on 
a tin plate, or anywhere else." 
"well, then, what's the sense in wasting the plates?" 
"why, blame it all, it ain't the prisoner's plates." 
"but it's somebody's plates, ain't it?" 
"well, spos'n it is? what does the prisoner care whose-" 
he broke off there, because we heard the breakfast-horn blowing. so we 
cleared out for the house. 
along during the morning i borrowed a sheet and a white shirt off of the 
clothes-line; and i found an old sack and put them in it, and we went 
down and got the fox-fire, and put that in too. i called it borrowing, 
because that was what pap always called it; but tom said it warn't 
borrowing, it was stealing. he said we was representing prisoners; and 
prisoners don't care how they get a thing so they get it, and nobody 
don't blame them for it, either. it ain't no crime in a prisoner to 
steal the thing he needs to get away with, tom said; it's his right; and 
so, as long as we was representing a prisoner, we had a perfect right to 
steal anything on this place we had the least use for to get ourselves 
out of prison with. he said if we warn't prisoners it would be a very 
different thing, and nobody but a mean, ornery person would steal when he 
warn't a prisoner. so we allowed we would steal everything there was 
that come handy. and yet he made a mighty fuss, one day, after that, 
when i stole a watermelon out of the nigger-patch and eat it; and he made 
me go and give the niggers a dime without telling them what it was for. 
tom said that what he meant was, we could steal anything we needed. well, 
i says, i needed the watermelon. but he said i didn't need it to get out 
of prison with; there's where the difference was. he said if i'd a 
wanted it to hide a knife in, and smuggle it to jim to kill the seneskal 
with, it would a been all right. so i let it go at that, though i 
couldn't see no advantage in my representing a prisoner if i got to set 
down and chaw over a lot of gold-leaf distinctions like that every time i 
see a chance to hog a watermelon. 
well, as i was saying, we waited that morning till everybody was settled 
down to business, and nobody in sight around the yard; then tom he 
carried the sack into the lean-to whilst i stood off a piece to keep 
watch. by and by he come out, and we went and set down on the woodpile 
to talk. he says: 
"everything's all right now except tools; and that's easy fixed." 
"tools?" i says. 
"yes." 
"tools for what?" 
"why, to dig with. we ain't a-going to gnaw him out, are we?" 
"ain't them old crippled picks and things in there good enough to dig a 
nigger out with?" i says. 
he turns on me, looking pitying enough to make a body cry, and says: 
"huck finn, did you ever hear of a prisoner having picks and shovels, and 
all the modern conveniences in his wardrobe to dig himself out with? now 
i want to ask you-if you got any reasonableness in you at all-what kind 
of a show would that give him to be a hero? why, they might as well lend 
him the key and done with it. picks and shovels-why, they wouldn't 
furnish 'em to a king." 
"well, then," i says, "if we don't want the picks and shovels, what do we 
want?" 
"a couple of case-knives." 
"to dig the foundations out from under that cabin with?" 
"yes." 
"confound it, it's foolish, tom." 
"it don't make no difference how foolish it is, it's the right way-and 
it's the regular way. and there ain't no other way, that ever i heard 
of, and i've read all the books that gives any information about these 
things. they always dig out with a case-knife-and not through dirt, mind 
you; generly it's through solid rock. and it takes them weeks and weeks 
and weeks, and for ever and ever. why, look at one of them prisoners in 
the bottom dungeon of the castle deef, in the harbor of marseilles, that 
dug himself out that way; how long was he at it, you reckon?" 
"i don't know." 
"well, guess." 
"i don't know. a month and a half." 
"thirty-seven year-and he come out in china. that's the kind. i wish 
the bottom of this fortress was solid rock." 
"jim don't know nobody in china." 
"what's that got to do with it? neither did that other fellow. but 
you're always a-wandering off on a side issue. why can't you stick to 
the main point?" 
"all right-i don't care where he comes out, so he comes out; and jim 
don't, either, i reckon. but there's one thing, anyway-jim's too old to 
be dug out with a case-knife. he won't last." 
"yes he will last, too. you don't reckon it's going to take thirty-seven 
years to dig out through a dirt foundation, do you?" 
"how long will it take, tom?" 
"well, we can't resk being as long as we ought to, because it mayn't take 
very long for uncle silas to hear from down there by new orleans. he'll 
hear jim ain't from there. then his next move will be to advertise jim, 
or something like that. so we can't resk being as long digging him out 
as we ought to. by rights i reckon we ought to be a couple of years; but 
we can't. things being so uncertain, what i recommend is this: that we 
really dig right in, as quick as we can; and after that, we can let on, 
to ourselves, that we was at it thirty-seven years. then we can snatch 
him out and rush him away the first time there's an alarm. yes, i reckon 
that 'll be the best way." 
"now, there's sense in that," i says. "letting on don't cost nothing; 
letting on ain't no trouble; and if it's any object, i don't mind letting 
on we was at it a hundred and fifty year. it wouldn't strain me none, 
after i got my hand in. so i'll mosey along now, and smouch a couple of 
case-knives." 
"smouch three," he says; "we want one to make a saw out of." 
"tom, if it ain't unregular and irreligious to sejest it," i says, 
"there's an old rusty saw-blade around yonder sticking under the 
weather-boarding behind the smoke-house." 
he looked kind of weary and discouraged-like, and says: 
"it ain't no use to try to learn you nothing, huck. run along and smouch 
the knives-three of them." so i done it. 
chapter xxxvi. 
as soon as we reckoned everybody was asleep that night we went down the 
lightning-rod, and shut ourselves up in the lean-to, and got out our pile 
of fox-fire, and went to work. we cleared everything out of the way, 
about four or five foot along the middle of the bottom log. tom said we 
was right behind jim's bed now, and we'd dig in under it, and when we got 
through there couldn't nobody in the cabin ever know there was any hole 
there, because jim's counter-pin hung down most to the ground, and you'd 
have to raise it up and look under to see the hole. so we dug and dug 
with the case-knives till most midnight; and then we was dog-tired, and 
our hands was blistered, and yet you couldn't see we'd done anything 
hardly. at last i says: 
"this ain't no thirty-seven year job; this is a thirty-eight year job, 
tom sawyer." 
he never said nothing. but he sighed, and pretty soon he stopped 
digging, and then for a good little while i knowed that he was thinking. 
then he says: 
"it ain't no use, huck, it ain't a-going to work. if we was prisoners it 
would, because then we'd have as many years as we wanted, and no hurry; 
and we wouldn't get but a few minutes to dig, every day, while they was 
changing watches, and so our hands wouldn't get blistered, and we could 
keep it up right along, year in and year out, and do it right, and the 
way it ought to be done. but we can't fool along; we got to rush; we 
ain't got no time to spare. if we was to put in another night this way 
we'd have to knock off for a week to let our hands get well-couldn't 
touch a case-knife with them sooner." 
"well, then, what we going to do, tom?" 
"i'll tell you. it ain't right, and it ain't moral, and i wouldn't like 
it to get out; but there ain't only just the one way: we got to dig him 
out with the picks, and let on it's case-knives." 
"now you're talking!" i says; "your head gets leveler and leveler all 
the time, tom sawyer," i says. "picks is the thing, moral or no moral; 
and as for me, i don't care shucks for the morality of it, nohow. when i 
start in to steal a nigger, or a watermelon, or a sunday-school book, i 
ain't no ways particular how it's done so it's done. what i want is my 
nigger; or what i want is my watermelon; or what i want is my 
sunday-school book; and if a pick's the handiest thing, that's the thing 
i'm a-going to dig that nigger or that watermelon or that sunday-school 
book out with; and i don't give a dead rat what the authorities thinks 
about it nuther." 
"well," he says, "there's excuse for picks and letting-on in a case like 
this; if it warn't so, i wouldn't approve of it, nor i wouldn't stand by 
and see the rules broke-because right is right, and wrong is wrong, and 
a body ain't got no business doing wrong when he ain't ignorant and knows 
better. it might answer for you to dig jim out with a pick, without any 
letting on, because you don't know no better; but it wouldn't for me, 
because i do know better. gimme a case-knife." 
he had his own by him, but i handed him mine. he flung it down, and 
says: 
"gimme a case-knife." 
i didn't know just what to do-but then i thought. i scratched around 
amongst the old tools, and got a pickaxe and give it to him, and he took 
it and went to work, and never said a word. 
he was always just that particular. full of principle. 
so then i got a shovel, and then we picked and shoveled, turn about, and 
made the fur fly. we stuck to it about a half an hour, which was as long 
as we could stand up; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for it. 
when i got up stairs i looked out at the window and see tom doing his 
level best with the lightning-rod, but he couldn't come it, his hands was 
so sore. at last he says: 
"it ain't no use, it can't be done. what you reckon i better do? can't 
you think of no way?" 
"yes," i says, "but i reckon it ain't regular. come up the stairs, and 
let on it's a lightning-rod." 
so he done it. 
next day tom stole a pewter spoon and a brass candlestick in the house, 
for to make some pens for jim out of, and six tallow candles; and i hung 
around the nigger cabins and laid for a chance, and stole three tin 
plates. tom says it wasn't enough; but i said nobody wouldn't ever see 
the plates that jim throwed out, because they'd fall in the dog-fennel 
and jimpson weeds under the window-hole-then we could tote them back and 
he could use them over again. so tom was satisfied. then he says: 
"now, the thing to study out is, how to get the things to jim." 
"take them in through the hole," i says, "when we get it done." 
he only just looked scornful, and said something about nobody ever heard 
of such an idiotic idea, and then he went to studying. by and by he said 
he had ciphered out two or three ways, but there warn't no need to decide 
on any of them yet. said we'd got to post jim first. 
that night we went down the lightning-rod a little after ten, and took 
one of the candles along, and listened under the window-hole, and heard 
jim snoring; so we pitched it in, and it didn't wake him. then we 
whirled in with the pick and shovel, and in about two hours and a half 
the job was done. we crept in under jim's bed and into the cabin, and 
pawed around and found the candle and lit it, and stood over jim awhile, 
and found him looking hearty and healthy, and then we woke him up gentle 
and gradual. he was so glad to see us he most cried; and called us 
honey, and all the pet names he could think of; and was for having us 
hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with right away, 
and clearing out without losing any time. but tom he showed him how 
unregular it would be, and set down and told him all about our plans, and 
how we could alter them in a minute any time there was an alarm; and not 
to be the least afraid, because we would see he got away, sure. so jim 
he said it was all right, and we set there and talked over old times 
awhile, and then tom asked a lot of questions, and when jim told him 
uncle silas come in every day or two to pray with him, and aunt sally 
come in to see if he was comfortable and had plenty to eat, and both of 
them was kind as they could be, tom says: 
"now i know how to fix it. we'll send you some things by them." 
i said, "don't do nothing of the kind; it's one of the most jackass ideas 
i ever struck;" but he never paid no attention to me; went right on. it 
was his way when he'd got his plans set. 
so he told jim how we'd have to smuggle in the rope-ladder pie and other 
large things by nat, the nigger that fed him, and he must be on the 
lookout, and not be surprised, and not let nat see him open them; and we 
would put small things in uncle's coat-pockets and he must steal them 
out; and we would tie things to aunt's apron-strings or put them in her 
apron-pocket, if we got a chance; and told him what they would be and 
what they was for. and told him how to keep a journal on the shirt with 
his blood, and all that. he told him everything. jim he couldn't see no 
sense in the most of it, but he allowed we was white folks and knowed 
better than him; so he was satisfied, and said he would do it all just as 
tom said. 
jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and tobacco; so we had a right down good 
sociable time; then we crawled out through the hole, and so home to bed, 
with hands that looked like they'd been chawed. tom was in high spirits. 
he said it was the best fun he ever had in his life, and the most 
intellectural; and said if he only could see his way to it we would keep 
it up all the rest of our lives and leave jim to our children to get out; 
for he believed jim would come to like it better and better the more he 
got used to it. he said that in that way it could be strung out to as 
much as eighty year, and would be the best time on record. and he said 
it would make us all celebrated that had a hand in it. 
in the morning we went out to the woodpile and chopped up the brass 
candlestick into handy sizes, and tom put them and the pewter spoon in 
his pocket. then we went to the nigger cabins, and while i got nat's 
notice off, tom shoved a piece of candlestick into the middle of a 
corn-pone that was in jim's pan, and we went along with nat to see how it 
would work, and it just worked noble; when jim bit into it it most mashed 
all his teeth out; and there warn't ever anything could a worked better. 
tom said so himself. jim he never let on but what it was only just a 
piece of rock or something like that that's always getting into bread, 
you know; but after that he never bit into nothing but what he jabbed his 
fork into it in three or four places first. 
and whilst we was a-standing there in the dimmish light, here comes a 
couple of the hounds bulging in from under jim's bed; and they kept on 
piling in till there was eleven of them, and there warn't hardly room in 
there to get your breath. by jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to 
door! the nigger nat he only just hollered "witches" once, and keeled 
over on to the floor amongst the dogs, and begun to groan like he was 
dying. tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of jim's meat, and 
the dogs went for it, and in two seconds he was out himself and back 
again and shut the door, and i knowed he'd fixed the other door too. 
then he went to work on the nigger, coaxing him and petting him, and 
asking him if he'd been imagining he saw something again. he raised up, 
and blinked his eyes around, and says: 
"mars sid, you'll say i's a fool, but if i didn't b'lieve i see most a 
million dogs, er devils, er some'n, i wisht i may die right heah in dese 
tracks. i did, mos' sholy. mars sid, i felt um-i felt um, sah; dey was 
all over me. dad fetch it, i jis' wisht i could git my han's on one er 
dem witches jis' wunst-on'y jis' wunst-it's all i'd ast. but mos'ly i 
wisht dey'd lemme 'lone, i does." 
tom says: 
"well, i tell you what i think. what makes them come here just at this 
runaway nigger's breakfast-time? it's because they're hungry; that's the 
reason. you make them a witch pie; that's the thing for you to do." 
"but my lan', mars sid, how's i gwyne to make 'm a witch pie? i doan' 
know how to make it. i hain't ever hearn er sich a thing b'fo'." 
"well, then, i'll have to make it myself." 
"will you do it, honey?-will you? i'll wusshup de groun' und' yo' foot, 
i will!" 
"all right, i'll do it, seeing it's you, and you've been good to us and 
showed us the runaway nigger. but you got to be mighty careful. when we 
come around, you turn your back; and then whatever we've put in the pan, 
don't you let on you see it at all. and don't you look when jim unloads 
the pan-something might happen, i don't know what. and above all, don't 
you handle the witch-things." 
"hannel 'm, mars sid? what is you a-talkin' 'bout? i wouldn' lay de 
weight er my finger on um, not f'r ten hund'd thous'n billion dollars, i 
wouldn't." 
chapter xxxvii. 
that was all fixed. so then we went away and went to the rubbage-pile in 
the back yard, where they keep the old boots, and rags, and pieces of 
bottles, and wore-out tin things, and all such truck, and scratched 
around and found an old tin washpan, and stopped up the holes as well as 
we could, to bake the pie in, and took it down cellar and stole it full 
of flour and started for breakfast, and found a couple of shingle-nails 
that tom said would be handy for a prisoner to scrabble his name and 
sorrows on the dungeon walls with, and dropped one of them in aunt 
sally's apron-pocket which was hanging on a chair, and t'other we stuck 
in the band of uncle silas's hat, which was on the bureau, because we 
heard the children say their pa and ma was going to the runaway nigger's 
house this morning, and then went to breakfast, and tom dropped the 
pewter spoon in uncle silas's coat-pocket, and aunt sally wasn't come 
yet, so we had to wait a little while. 
and when she come she was hot and red and cross, and couldn't hardly wait 
for the blessing; and then she went to sluicing out coffee with one hand 
and cracking the handiest child's head with her thimble with the other, 
and says: 
"i've hunted high and i've hunted low, and it does beat all what has 
become of your other shirt." 
my heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things, and a hard 
piece of corn-crust started down my throat after it and got met on the 
road with a cough, and was shot across the table, and took one of the 
children in the eye and curled him up like a fishing-worm, and let a cry 
out of him the size of a warwhoop, and tom he turned kinder blue around 
the gills, and it all amounted to a considerable state of things for 
about a quarter of a minute or as much as that, and i would a sold out 
for half price if there was a bidder. but after that we was all right 
again-it was the sudden surprise of it that knocked us so kind of cold. 
uncle silas he says: 
"it's most uncommon curious, i can't understand it. i know perfectly 
well i took it off, because-" 
"because you hain't got but one on. just listen at the man! i know you 
took it off, and know it by a better way than your wool-gethering memory, 
too, because it was on the clo's-line yesterday-i see it there myself. 
but it's gone, that's the long and the short of it, and you'll just have 
to change to a red flann'l one till i can get time to make a new one. 
and it 'll be the third i've made in two years. it just keeps a body on 
the jump to keep you in shirts; and whatever you do manage to do with 'm 
all is more'n i can make out. a body 'd think you would learn to take 
some sort of care of 'em at your time of life." 
"i know it, sally, and i do try all i can. but it oughtn't to be 
altogether my fault, because, you know, i don't see them nor have nothing 
to do with them except when they're on me; and i don't believe i've ever 
lost one of them off of me." 
"well, it ain't your fault if you haven't, silas; you'd a done it if you 
could, i reckon. and the shirt ain't all that's gone, nuther. ther's a 
spoon gone; and that ain't all. there was ten, and now ther's only nine. 
the calf got the shirt, i reckon, but the calf never took the spoon, 
that's certain." 
"why, what else is gone, sally?" 
"ther's six candles gone-that's what. the rats could a got the candles, 
and i reckon they did; i wonder they don't walk off with the whole place, 
the way you're always going to stop their holes and don't do it; and if 
they warn't fools they'd sleep in your hair, silas-you'd never find it 
out; but you can't lay the spoon on the rats, and that i know." 
"well, sally, i'm in fault, and i acknowledge it; i've been remiss; but i 
won't let to-morrow go by without stopping up them holes." 
"oh, i wouldn't hurry; next year 'll do. matilda angelina araminta 
phelps!" 
whack comes the thimble, and the child snatches her claws out of the 
sugar-bowl without fooling around any. just then the nigger woman steps 
on to the passage, and says: 
"missus, dey's a sheet gone." 
"a sheet gone! well, for the land's sake!" 
"i'll stop up them holes to-day," says uncle silas, looking sorrowful. 
"oh, do shet up!-s'pose the rats took the sheet? where's it gone, 
lize?" 
"clah to goodness i hain't no notion, miss' sally. she wuz on de 
clo'sline yistiddy, but she done gone: she ain' dah no mo' now." 
"i reckon the world is coming to an end. i never see the beat of it in 
all my born days. a shirt, and a sheet, and a spoon, and six can-" 
"missus," comes a young yaller wench, "dey's a brass cannelstick miss'n." 
"cler out from here, you hussy, er i'll take a skillet to ye!" 
well, she was just a-biling. i begun to lay for a chance; i reckoned i 
would sneak out and go for the woods till the weather moderated. she 
kept a-raging right along, running her insurrection all by herself, and 
everybody else mighty meek and quiet; and at last uncle silas, looking 
kind of foolish, fishes up that spoon out of his pocket. she stopped, 
with her mouth open and her hands up; and as for me, i wished i was in 
jeruslem or somewheres. but not long, because she says: 
"it's just as i expected. so you had it in your pocket all the time; and 
like as not you've got the other things there, too. how'd it get there?" 
"i reely don't know, sally," he says, kind of apologizing, "or you know i 
would tell. i was a-studying over my text in acts seventeen before 
breakfast, and i reckon i put it in there, not noticing, meaning to put 
my testament in, and it must be so, because my testament ain't in; but 
i'll go and see; and if the testament is where i had it, i'll know i 
didn't put it in, and that will show that i laid the testament down and 
took up the spoon, and-" 
"oh, for the land's sake! give a body a rest! go 'long now, the whole 
kit and biling of ye; and don't come nigh me again till i've got back my 
peace of mind." 
i'd a heard her if she'd a said it to herself, let alone speaking it out; 
and i'd a got up and obeyed her if i'd a been dead. as we was passing 
through the setting-room the old man he took up his hat, and the 
shingle-nail fell out on the floor, and he just merely picked it up and 
laid it on the mantel-shelf, and never said nothing, and went out. tom 
see him do it, and remembered about the spoon, and says: 
"well, it ain't no use to send things by him no more, he ain't reliable." 
then he says: "but he done us a good turn with the spoon, anyway, 
without knowing it, and so we'll go and do him one without him knowing 
it-stop up his rat-holes." 
there was a noble good lot of them down cellar, and it took us a whole 
hour, but we done the job tight and good and shipshape. then we heard 
steps on the stairs, and blowed out our light and hid; and here comes the 
old man, with a candle in one hand and a bundle of stuff in t'other, 
looking as absent-minded as year before last. he went a mooning around, 
first to one rat-hole and then another, till he'd been to them all. then 
he stood about five minutes, picking tallow-drip off of his candle and 
thinking. then he turns off slow and dreamy towards the stairs, saying: 
"well, for the life of me i can't remember when i done it. i could show 
her now that i warn't to blame on account of the rats. but never mind 
let it go. i reckon it wouldn't do no good." 
and so he went on a-mumbling up stairs, and then we left. he was a 
mighty nice old man. and always is. 
tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon, but he said 
we'd got to have it; so he took a think. when he had ciphered it out he 
told me how we was to do; then we went and waited around the spoon-basket 
till we see aunt sally coming, and then tom went to counting the spoons 
and laying them out to one side, and i slid one of them up my sleeve, and 
tom says: 
"why, aunt sally, there ain't but nine spoons yet." 
she says: 
"go 'long to your play, and don't bother me. i know better, i counted 'm 
myself." 
"well, i've counted them twice, aunty, and i can't make but nine." 
she looked out of all patience, but of course she come to count-anybody 
would. 
"i declare to gracious ther' ain't but nine!" she says. "why, what in 
the world-plague take the things, i'll count 'm again." 
so i slipped back the one i had, and when she got done counting, she 
says: 
"hang the troublesome rubbage, ther's ten now!" and she looked huffy and 
bothered both. but tom says: 
"why, aunty, i don't think there's ten." 
"you numskull, didn't you see me count 'm?" 
"i know, but-" 
"well, i'll count 'm again." 
so i smouched one, and they come out nine, same as the other time. well, 
she was in a tearing way-just a-trembling all over, she was so mad. but 
she counted and counted till she got that addled she'd start to count in 
the basket for a spoon sometimes; and so, three times they come out 
right, and three times they come out wrong. then she grabbed up the 
basket and slammed it across the house and knocked the cat galley-west; 
and she said cle'r out and let her have some peace, and if we come 
bothering around her again betwixt that and dinner she'd skin us. so we 
had the odd spoon, and dropped it in her apron-pocket whilst she was 
a-giving us our sailing orders, and jim got it all right, along with her 
shingle nail, before noon. we was very well satisfied with this 
business, and tom allowed it was worth twice the trouble it took, because 
he said now she couldn't ever count them spoons twice alike again to save 
her life; and wouldn't believe she'd counted them right if she did; and 
said that after she'd about counted her head off for the next three days 
he judged she'd give it up and offer to kill anybody that wanted her to 
ever count them any more. 
so we put the sheet back on the line that night, and stole one out of her 
closet; and kept on putting it back and stealing it again for a couple of 
days till she didn't know how many sheets she had any more, and she 
didn't care, and warn't a-going to bullyrag the rest of her soul out 
about it, and wouldn't count them again not to save her life; she druther 
die first. 
so we was all right now, as to the shirt and the sheet and the spoon and 
the candles, by the help of the calf and the rats and the mixed-up 
counting; and as to the candlestick, it warn't no consequence, it would 
blow over by and by. 
but that pie was a job; we had no end of trouble with that pie. we fixed 
it up away down in the woods, and cooked it there; and we got it done at 
last, and very satisfactory, too; but not all in one day; and we had to 
use up three wash-pans full of flour before we got through, and we got 
burnt pretty much all over, in places, and eyes put out with the smoke; 
because, you see, we didn't want nothing but a crust, and we couldn't 
prop it up right, and she would always cave in. but of course we thought 
of the right way at last-which was to cook the ladder, too, in the 
pie. so then we laid in with jim the second night, and tore up the sheet 
all in little strings and twisted them together, and long before daylight 
we had a lovely rope that you could a hung a person with. we let on it 
took nine months to make it. 
and in the forenoon we took it down to the woods, but it wouldn't go into 
the pie. being made of a whole sheet, that way, there was rope enough 
for forty pies if we'd a wanted them, and plenty left over for soup, or 
sausage, or anything you choose. we could a had a whole dinner. 
but we didn't need it. all we needed was just enough for the pie, 
and so we throwed the rest away. we didn't cook none of the pies in the 
wash-pan-afraid the solder would melt; but uncle silas he had a noble 
brass warming-pan which he thought considerable of, because it belonged 
to one of his ancesters with a long wooden handle that come over from 
england with william the conqueror in the mayflower or one of them early 
ships and was hid away up garret with a lot of other old pots and things 
that was valuable, not on account of being any account, because they 
warn't, but on account of them being relicts, you know, and we snaked her 
out, private, and took her down there, but she failed on the first pies, 
because we didn't know how, but she come up smiling on the last one. we 
took and lined her with dough, and set her in the coals, and loaded her 
up with rag rope, and put on a dough roof, and shut down the lid, and put 
hot embers on top, and stood off five foot, with the long handle, cool 
and comfortable, and in fifteen minutes she turned out a pie that was a 
satisfaction to look at. but the person that et it would want to fetch a 
couple of kags of toothpicks along, for if that rope ladder wouldn't 
cramp him down to business i don't know nothing what i'm talking about, 
and lay him in enough stomach-ache to last him till next time, too. 
nat didn't look when we put the witch pie in jim's pan; and we put the 
three tin plates in the bottom of the pan under the vittles; and so jim 
got everything all right, and as soon as he was by himself he busted into 
the pie and hid the rope ladder inside of his straw tick, and scratched 
some marks on a tin plate and throwed it out of the window-hole. 
chapter xxxviii. 
making them pens was a distressid tough job, and so was the saw; and jim 
allowed the inscription was going to be the toughest of all. that's the 
one which the prisoner has to scrabble on the wall. but he had to have 
it; tom said he'd got to; there warn't no case of a state prisoner not 
scrabbling his inscription to leave behind, and his coat of arms. 
"look at lady jane grey," he says; "look at gilford dudley; look at old 
northumberland! why, huck, s'pose it is considerble trouble?-what you 
going to do?-how you going to get around it? jim's got to do his 
inscription and coat of arms. they all do." 
jim says: 
"why, mars tom, i hain't got no coat o' arm; i hain't got nuffn but dish 
yer ole shirt, en you knows i got to keep de journal on dat." 
"oh, you don't understand, jim; a coat of arms is very different." 
"well," i says, "jim's right, anyway, when he says he ain't got no coat 
of arms, because he hain't." 
"i reckon i knowed that," tom says, "but you bet he'll have one before he 
goes out of this-because he's going out right, and there ain't going to 
be no flaws in his record." 
so whilst me and jim filed away at the pens on a brickbat apiece, jim 
a-making his'n out of the brass and i making mine out of the spoon, tom 
set to work to think out the coat of arms. by and by he said he'd struck 
so many good ones he didn't hardly know which to take, but there was one 
which he reckoned he'd decide on. he says: 
"on the scutcheon we'll have a bend or in the dexter base, a saltire 
murrey in the fess, with a dog, couchant, for common charge, and under 
his foot a chain embattled, for slavery, with a chevron vert in a chief 
engrailed, and three invected lines on a field azure, with the nombril 
points rampant on a dancette indented; crest, a runaway nigger, sable, 
with his bundle over his shoulder on a bar sinister; and a couple of 
gules for supporters, which is you and me; motto, maggiore fretta, minore 
otto. got it out of a book-means the more haste the less speed." 
"geewhillikins," i says, "but what does the rest of it mean?" 
"we ain't got no time to bother over that," he says; "we got to dig in 
like all git-out." 
"well, anyway," i says, "what's some of it? what's a fess?" 
"a fess-a fess is-you don't need to know what a fess is. i'll show him 
how to make it when he gets to it." 
"shucks, tom," i says, "i think you might tell a person. what's a bar 
sinister?" 
"oh, i don't know. but he's got to have it. all the nobility does." 
that was just his way. if it didn't suit him to explain a thing to you, 
he wouldn't do it. you might pump at him a week, it wouldn't make no 
difference. 
he'd got all that coat of arms business fixed, so now he started in to 
finish up the rest of that part of the work, which was to plan out a 
mournful inscription-said jim got to have one, like they all done. he 
made up a lot, and wrote them out on a paper, and read them off, so: 
1. here a captive heart busted. 2. here a poor prisoner, forsook by the 
world and friends, fretted his sorrowful life. 3. here a lonely heart 
broke, and a worn spirit went to its rest, after thirty-seven years of 
solitary captivity. 4. here, homeless and friendless, after thirty-seven 
years of bitter captivity, perished a noble stranger, natural son of 
louis xiv. 
tom's voice trembled whilst he was reading them, and he most broke down. 
when he got done he couldn't no way make up his mind which one for jim to 
scrabble on to the wall, they was all so good; but at last he allowed he 
would let him scrabble them all on. jim said it would take him a year to 
scrabble such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail, and he didn't 
know how to make letters, besides; but tom said he would block them out 
for him, and then he wouldn't have nothing to do but just follow the 
lines. then pretty soon he says: 
"come to think, the logs ain't a-going to do; they don't have log walls 
in a dungeon: we got to dig the inscriptions into a rock. we'll fetch a 
rock." 
jim said the rock was worse than the logs; he said it would take him such 
a pison long time to dig them into a rock he wouldn't ever get out. but 
tom said he would let me help him do it. then he took a look to see how 
me and jim was getting along with the pens. it was most pesky tedious 
hard work and slow, and didn't give my hands no show to get well of the 
sores, and we didn't seem to make no headway, hardly; so tom says: 
"i know how to fix it. we got to have a rock for the coat of arms and 
mournful inscriptions, and we can kill two birds with that same rock. 
there's a gaudy big grindstone down at the mill, and we'll smouch it, and 
carve the things on it, and file out the pens and the saw on it, too." 
it warn't no slouch of an idea; and it warn't no slouch of a grindstone 
nuther; but we allowed we'd tackle it. it warn't quite midnight yet, so 
we cleared out for the mill, leaving jim at work. we smouched the 
grindstone, and set out to roll her home, but it was a most nation tough 
job. sometimes, do what we could, we couldn't keep her from falling over, 
and she come mighty near mashing us every time. tom said she was going 
to get one of us, sure, before we got through. we got her half way; and 
then we was plumb played out, and most drownded with sweat. we see it 
warn't no use; we got to go and fetch jim so he raised up his bed and 
slid the chain off of the bed-leg, and wrapt it round and round his neck, 
and we crawled out through our hole and down there, and jim and me laid 
into that grindstone and walked her along like nothing; and tom 
superintended. he could out-superintend any boy i ever see. he knowed 
how to do everything. 
our hole was pretty big, but it warn't big enough to get the grindstone 
through; but jim he took the pick and soon made it big enough. then tom 
marked out them things on it with the nail, and set jim to work on them, 
with the nail for a chisel and an iron bolt from the rubbage in the 
lean-to for a hammer, and told him to work till the rest of his candle 
quit on him, and then he could go to bed, and hide the grindstone under 
his straw tick and sleep on it. then we helped him fix his chain back on 
the bed-leg, and was ready for bed ourselves. but tom thought of 
something, and says: 
"you got any spiders in here, jim?" 
"no, sah, thanks to goodness i hain't, mars tom." 
"all right, we'll get you some." 
"but bless you, honey, i doan' want none. i's afeard un um. i jis' 's 
soon have rattlesnakes aroun'." 
tom thought a minute or two, and says: 
"it's a good idea. and i reckon it's been done. it must a been done; it 
stands to reason. yes, it's a prime good idea. where could you keep 
it?" 
"keep what, mars tom?" 
"why, a rattlesnake." 
"de goodness gracious alive, mars tom! why, if dey was a rattlesnake to 
come in heah i'd take en bust right out thoo dat log wall, i would, wid 
my head." 
why, jim, you wouldn't be afraid of it after a little. you could tame 
it." 
"tame it!" 
"yes-easy enough. every animal is grateful for kindness and petting, 
and they wouldn't think of hurting a person that pets them. any book 
will tell you that. you try-that's all i ask; just try for two or three 
days. why, you can get him so in a little while that he'll love you; and 
sleep with you; and won't stay away from you a minute; and will let you 
wrap him round your neck and put his head in your mouth." 
"please, mars tom-doan' talk so! i can't stan' it! he'd let me shove 
his head in my mouf-fer a favor, hain't it? i lay he'd wait a pow'ful 
long time 'fo' i ast him. en mo' en dat, i doan' want him to sleep wid 
me." 
"jim, don't act so foolish. a prisoner's got to have some kind of a dumb 
pet, and if a rattlesnake hain't ever been tried, why, there's more glory 
to be gained in your being the first to ever try it than any other way 
you could ever think of to save your life." 
"why, mars tom, i doan' want no sich glory. snake take 'n bite jim's 
chin off, den whah is de glory? no, sah, i doan' want no sich doin's." 
"blame it, can't you try? i only want you to try-you needn't keep it up 
if it don't work." 
"but de trouble all done ef de snake bite me while i's a tryin' him. 
mars tom, i's willin' to tackle mos' anything 'at ain't onreasonable, but 
ef you en huck fetches a rattlesnake in heah for me to tame, i's gwyne to 
leave, dat's shore." 
"well, then, let it go, let it go, if you're so bull-headed about it. we 
can get you some garter-snakes, and you can tie some buttons on their 
tails, and let on they're rattlesnakes, and i reckon that 'll have to 
do." 
"i k'n stan' dem, mars tom, but blame' 'f i couldn' get along widout um, 
i tell you dat. i never knowed b'fo' 't was so much bother and trouble 
to be a prisoner." 
"well, it always is when it's done right. you got any rats around here?" 
"no, sah, i hain't seed none." 
"well, we'll get you some rats." 
"why, mars tom, i doan' want no rats. dey's de dadblamedest creturs to 
'sturb a body, en rustle roun' over 'im, en bite his feet, when he's 
tryin' to sleep, i ever see. no, sah, gimme g'yarter-snakes, 'f i's got 
to have 'm, but doan' gimme no rats; i hain' got no use f'r um, skasely." 
"but, jim, you got to have 'em-they all do. so don't make no more fuss 
about it. prisoners ain't ever without rats. there ain't no instance of 
it. and they train them, and pet them, and learn them tricks, and they 
get to be as sociable as flies. but you got to play music to them. you 
got anything to play music on?" 
"i ain' got nuffn but a coase comb en a piece o' paper, en a juice-harp; 
but i reck'n dey wouldn' take no stock in a juice-harp." 
"yes they would. they don't care what kind of music 'tis. a jews-harp's 
plenty good enough for a rat. all animals like music-in a prison they 
dote on it. specially, painful music; and you can't get no other kind 
out of a jews-harp. it always interests them; they come out to see 
what's the matter with you. yes, you're all right; you're fixed very 
well. you want to set on your bed nights before you go to sleep, and 
early in the mornings, and play your jews-harp; play 'the last link is 
broken'-that's the thing that 'll scoop a rat quicker 'n anything else; 
and when you've played about two minutes you'll see all the rats, and the 
snakes, and spiders, and things begin to feel worried about you, and 
come. and they'll just fairly swarm over you, and have a noble good 
time." 
"yes, dey will, i reck'n, mars tom, but what kine er time is jim havin'? 
blest if i kin see de pint. but i'll do it ef i got to. i reck'n i 
better keep de animals satisfied, en not have no trouble in de house." 
tom waited to think it over, and see if there wasn't nothing else; and 
pretty soon he says: 
"oh, there's one thing i forgot. could you raise a flower here, do you 
reckon?" 
"i doan know but maybe i could, mars tom; but it's tolable dark in heah, 
en i ain' got no use f'r no flower, nohow, en she'd be a pow'ful sight o' 
trouble." 
"well, you try it, anyway. some other prisoners has done it." 
"one er dem big cat-tail-lookin' mullen-stalks would grow in heah, mars 
tom, i reck'n, but she wouldn't be wuth half de trouble she'd coss." 
"don't you believe it. we'll fetch you a little one and you plant it in 
the corner over there, and raise it. and don't call it mullen, call it 
pitchiola-that's its right name when it's in a prison. and you want to 
water it with your tears." 
"why, i got plenty spring water, mars tom." 
"you don't want spring water; you want to water it with your tears. it's 
the way they always do." 
"why, mars tom, i lay i kin raise one er dem mullen-stalks twyste wid 
spring water whiles another man's a start'n one wid tears." 
"that ain't the idea. you got to do it with tears." 
"she'll die on my han's, mars tom, she sholy will; kase i doan' skasely 
ever cry." 
so tom was stumped. but he studied it over, and then said jim would have 
to worry along the best he could with an onion. he promised he would go 
to the nigger cabins and drop one, private, in jim's coffee-pot, in the 
morning. jim said he would "jis' 's soon have tobacker in his coffee;" 
and found so much fault with it, and with the work and bother of raising 
the mullen, and jews-harping the rats, and petting and flattering up the 
snakes and spiders and things, on top of all the other work he had to do 
on pens, and inscriptions, and journals, and things, which made it more 
trouble and worry and responsibility to be a prisoner than anything he 
ever undertook, that tom most lost all patience with him; and said he was 
just loadened down with more gaudier chances than a prisoner ever had in 
the world to make a name for himself, and yet he didn't know enough to 
appreciate them, and they was just about wasted on him. so jim he was 
sorry, and said he wouldn't behave so no more, and then me and tom shoved 
for bed. 
chapter xxxix. 
in the morning we went up to the village and bought a wire rat-trap and 
fetched it down, and unstopped the best rat-hole, and in about an hour we 
had fifteen of the bulliest kind of ones; and then we took it and put it 
in a safe place under aunt sally's bed. but while we was gone for 
spiders little thomas franklin benjamin jefferson elexander phelps found 
it there, and opened the door of it to see if the rats would come out, 
and they did; and aunt sally she come in, and when we got back she was 
a-standing on top of the bed raising cain, and the rats was doing what 
they could to keep off the dull times for her. so she took and dusted us 
both with the hickry, and we was as much as two hours catching another 
fifteen or sixteen, drat that meddlesome cub, and they warn't the 
likeliest, nuther, because the first haul was the pick of the flock. 
i never see a likelier lot of rats than what that first haul was. 
we got a splendid stock of sorted spiders, and bugs, and frogs, and 
caterpillars, and one thing or another; and we like to got a hornet's 
nest, but we didn't. the family was at home. we didn't give it right 
up, but stayed with them as long as we could; because we allowed we'd 
tire them out or they'd got to tire us out, and they done it. then we 
got allycumpain and rubbed on the places, and was pretty near all right 
again, but couldn't set down convenient. and so we went for the snakes, 
and grabbed a couple of dozen garters and house-snakes, and put them in a 
bag, and put it in our room, and by that time it was supper-time, and a 
rattling good honest day's work: and hungry?-oh, no, i reckon not! and 
there warn't a blessed snake up there when we went back-we didn't half 
tie the sack, and they worked out somehow, and left. but it didn't 
matter much, because they was still on the premises somewheres. so we 
judged we could get some of them again. no, there warn't no real 
scarcity of snakes about the house for a considerable spell. you'd see 
them dripping from the rafters and places every now and then; and they 
generly landed in your plate, or down the back of your neck, and most of 
the time where you didn't want them. well, they was handsome and 
striped, and there warn't no harm in a million of them; but that never 
made no difference to aunt sally; she despised snakes, be the breed what 
they might, and she couldn't stand them no way you could fix it; and 
every time one of them flopped down on her, it didn't make no difference 
what she was doing, she would just lay that work down and light out. i 
never see such a woman. and you could hear her whoop to jericho. you 
couldn't get her to take a-holt of one of them with the tongs. and if 
she turned over and found one in bed she would scramble out and lift a 
howl that you would think the house was afire. she disturbed the old man 
so that he said he could most wish there hadn't ever been no snakes 
created. why, after every last snake had been gone clear out of the 
house for as much as a week aunt sally warn't over it yet; she warn't 
near over it; when she was setting thinking about something you could 
touch her on the back of her neck with a feather and she would jump right 
out of her stockings. it was very curious. but tom said all women was 
just so. he said they was made that way for some reason or other. 
we got a licking every time one of our snakes come in her way, and she 
allowed these lickings warn't nothing to what she would do if we ever 
loaded up the place again with them. i didn't mind the lickings, because 
they didn't amount to nothing; but i minded the trouble we had to lay in 
another lot. but we got them laid in, and all the other things; and you 
never see a cabin as blithesome as jim's was when they'd all swarm out 
for music and go for him. jim didn't like the spiders, and the spiders 
didn't like jim; and so they'd lay for him, and make it mighty warm for 
him. and he said that between the rats and the snakes and the grindstone 
there warn't no room in bed for him, skasely; and when there was, a body 
couldn't sleep, it was so lively, and it was always lively, he said, 
because they never all slept at one time, but took turn about, so when 
the snakes was asleep the rats was on deck, and when the rats turned in 
the snakes come on watch, so he always had one gang under him, in his 
way, and t'other gang having a circus over him, and if he got up to hunt 
a new place the spiders would take a chance at him as he crossed over. 
he said if he ever got out this time he wouldn't ever be a prisoner 
again, not for a salary. 
well, by the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape. the 
shirt was sent in early, in a pie, and every time a rat bit jim he would 
get up and write a little in his journal whilst the ink was fresh; the 
pens was made, the inscriptions and so on was all carved on the 
grindstone; the bed-leg was sawed in two, and we had et up the sawdust, 
and it give us a most amazing stomach-ache. we reckoned we was all going 
to die, but didn't. it was the most undigestible sawdust i ever see; and 
tom said the same. but as i was saying, we'd got all the work done now, 
at last; and we was all pretty much fagged out, too, but mainly jim. the 
old man had wrote a couple of times to the plantation below orleans to 
come and get their runaway nigger, but hadn't got no answer, because 
there warn't no such plantation; so he allowed he would advertise jim in 
the st. louis and new orleans papers; and when he mentioned the st. louis 
ones it give me the cold shivers, and i see we hadn't no time to lose. 
so tom said, now for the nonnamous letters. 
"what's them?" i says. 
"warnings to the people that something is up. sometimes it's done one 
way, sometimes another. but there's always somebody spying around that 
gives notice to the governor of the castle. when louis xvi. was going to 
light out of the tooleries a servant-girl done it. it's a very good way, 
and so is the nonnamous letters. we'll use them both. and it's usual 
for the prisoner's mother to change clothes with him, and she stays in, 
and he slides out in her clothes. we'll do that, too." 
"but looky here, tom, what do we want to warn anybody for that 
something's up? let them find it out for themselves-it's their 
lookout." 
"yes, i know; but you can't depend on them. it's the way they've acted 
from the very start-left us to do everything. they're so confiding and 
mullet-headed they don't take notice of nothing at all. so if we don't 
give them notice there won't be nobody nor nothing to interfere with us, 
and so after all our hard work and trouble this escape 'll go off 
perfectly flat; won't amount to nothing-won't be nothing to it." 
"well, as for me, tom, that's the way i'd like." 
"shucks!" he says, and looked disgusted. so i says: 
"but i ain't going to make no complaint. any way that suits you suits 
me. what you going to do about the servant-girl?" 
"you'll be her. you slide in, in the middle of the night, and hook that 
yaller girl's frock." 
"why, tom, that 'll make trouble next morning; because, of course, she 
prob'bly hain't got any but that one." 
"i know; but you don't want it but fifteen minutes, to carry the 
nonnamous letter and shove it under the front door." 
"all right, then, i'll do it; but i could carry it just as handy in my 
own togs." 
"you wouldn't look like a servant-girl then, would you?" 
"no, but there won't be nobody to see what i look like, anyway." 
"that ain't got nothing to do with it. the thing for us to do is just to 
do our duty, and not worry about whether anybody sees us do it or not. 
hain't you got no principle at all?" 
"all right, i ain't saying nothing; i'm the servant-girl. who's jim's 
mother?" 
"i'm his mother. i'll hook a gown from aunt sally." 
"well, then, you'll have to stay in the cabin when me and jim leaves." 
"not much. i'll stuff jim's clothes full of straw and lay it on his bed 
to represent his mother in disguise, and jim 'll take the nigger woman's 
gown off of me and wear it, and we'll all evade together. when a 
prisoner of style escapes it's called an evasion. it's always called so 
when a king escapes, f'rinstance. and the same with a king's son; it 
don't make no difference whether he's a natural one or an unnatural one." 
so tom he wrote the nonnamous letter, and i smouched the yaller wench's 
frock that night, and put it on, and shoved it under the front door, the 
way tom told me to. it said: 
beware. trouble is brewing. keep a sharp lookout. unknown friend. 
next night we stuck a picture, which tom drawed in blood, of a skull and 
crossbones on the front door; and next night another one of a coffin on 
the back door. i never see a family in such a sweat. they couldn't a 
been worse scared if the place had a been full of ghosts laying for them 
behind everything and under the beds and shivering through the air. if a 
door banged, aunt sally she jumped and said "ouch!" if anything fell, she 
jumped and said "ouch!" if you happened to touch her, when she warn't 
noticing, she done the same; she couldn't face noway and be satisfied, 
because she allowed there was something behind her every time-so she was 
always a-whirling around sudden, and saying "ouch," and before she'd got 
two-thirds around she'd whirl back again, and say it again; and she was 
afraid to go to bed, but she dasn't set up. so the thing was working 
very well, tom said; he said he never see a thing work more satisfactory. 
he said it showed it was done right. 
so he said, now for the grand bulge! so the very next morning at the 
streak of dawn we got another letter ready, and was wondering what we 
better do with it, because we heard them say at supper they was going to 
have a nigger on watch at both doors all night. tom he went down the 
lightning-rod to spy around; and the nigger at the back door was asleep, 
and he stuck it in the back of his neck and come back. this letter said: 
don't betray me, i wish to be your friend. there is a desprate gang of 
cut-throats from over in the indian territory going to steal your runaway 
nigger to-night, and they have been trying to scare you so as you will 
stay in the house and not bother them. i am one of the gang, but have 
got religgion and wish to quit it and lead an honest life again, and will 
betray the helish design. they will sneak down from northards, along the 
fence, at midnight exact, with a false key, and go in the nigger's cabin 
to get him. i am to be off a piece and blow a tin horn if i see any 
danger; but stead of that i will ba like a sheep soon as they get in and 
not blow at all; then whilst they are getting his chains loose, you slip 
there and lock them in, and can kill them at your leasure. don't do 
anything but just the way i am telling you; if you do they will suspicion 
something and raise whoop-jamboreehoo. i do not wish any reward but to 
know i have done the right thing. unknown friend. 
chapter xl. 
we was feeling pretty good after breakfast, and took my canoe and went 
over the river a-fishing, with a lunch, and had a good time, and took a 
look at the raft and found her all right, and got home late to supper, 
and found them in such a sweat and worry they didn't know which end they 
was standing on, and made us go right off to bed the minute we was done 
supper, and wouldn't tell us what the trouble was, and never let on a 
word about the new letter, but didn't need to, because we knowed as much 
about it as anybody did, and as soon as we was half up stairs and her 
back was turned we slid for the cellar cupboard and loaded up a good 
lunch and took it up to our room and went to bed, and got up about 
half-past eleven, and tom put on aunt sally's dress that he stole and 
was going to start with the lunch, but says: 
"where's the butter?" 
"i laid out a hunk of it," i says, "on a piece of a corn-pone." 
"well, you left it laid out, then-it ain't here." 
"we can get along without it," i says. 
"we can get along with it, too," he says; "just you slide down cellar and 
fetch it. and then mosey right down the lightning-rod and come along. 
i'll go and stuff the straw into jim's clothes to represent his mother in 
disguise, and be ready to ba like a sheep and shove soon as you get 
there." 
so out he went, and down cellar went i. the hunk of butter, big as a 
person's fist, was where i had left it, so i took up the slab of 
corn-pone with it on, and blowed out my light, and started up stairs very 
stealthy, and got up to the main floor all right, but here comes aunt 
sally with a candle, and i clapped the truck in my hat, and clapped my 
hat on my head, and the next second she see me; and she says: 
"you been down cellar?" 
"yes'm." 
"what you been doing down there?" 
"noth'n." 
"noth'n!" 
"no'm." 
"well, then, what possessed you to go down there this time of night?" 
"i don't know 'm." 
"you don't know? don't answer me that way. tom, i want to know what you 
been doing down there." 
"i hain't been doing a single thing, aunt sally, i hope to gracious if i 
have." 
i reckoned she'd let me go now, and as a generl thing she would; but i 
s'pose there was so many strange things going on she was just in a sweat 
about every little thing that warn't yard-stick straight; so she says, 
very decided: 
"you just march into that setting-room and stay there till i come. you 
been up to something you no business to, and i lay i'll find out what it 
is before i'm done with you." 
so she went away as i opened the door and walked into the setting-room. 
my, but there was a crowd there! fifteen farmers, and every one of them 
had a gun. i was most powerful sick, and slunk to a chair and set down. 
they was setting around, some of them talking a little, in a low voice, 
and all of them fidgety and uneasy, but trying to look like they warn't; 
but i knowed they was, because they was always taking off their hats, and 
putting them on, and scratching their heads, and changing their seats, 
and fumbling with their buttons. i warn't easy myself, but i didn't take 
my hat off, all the same. 
i did wish aunt sally would come, and get done with me, and lick me, if 
she wanted to, and let me get away and tell tom how we'd overdone this 
thing, and what a thundering hornet's-nest we'd got ourselves into, so we 
could stop fooling around straight off, and clear out with jim before 
these rips got out of patience and come for us. 
at last she come and begun to ask me questions, but i couldn't answer 
them straight, i didn't know which end of me was up; because these men 
was in such a fidget now that some was wanting to start right now and lay 
for them desperadoes, and saying it warn't but a few minutes to midnight; 
and others was trying to get them to hold on and wait for the 
sheep-signal; and here was aunty pegging away at the questions, and me 
a-shaking all over and ready to sink down in my tracks i was that scared; 
and the place getting hotter and hotter, and the butter beginning to melt 
and run down my neck and behind my ears; and pretty soon, when one of 
them says, "i'm for going and getting in the cabin first and right now, 
and catching them when they come," i most dropped; and a streak of butter 
come a-trickling down my forehead, and aunt sally she see it, and turns 
white as a sheet, and says: 
"for the land's sake, what is the matter with the child? he's got the 
brain-fever as shore as you're born, and they're oozing out!" 
and everybody runs to see, and she snatches off my hat, and out comes the 
bread and what was left of the butter, and she grabbed me, and hugged me, 
and says: 
"oh, what a turn you did give me! and how glad and grateful i am it ain't 
no worse; for luck's against us, and it never rains but it pours, and 
when i see that truck i thought we'd lost you, for i knowed by the color 
and all it was just like your brains would be if-dear, dear, whyd'nt you 
tell me that was what you'd been down there for, i wouldn't a cared. now 
cler out to bed, and don't lemme see no more of you till morning!" 
i was up stairs in a second, and down the lightning-rod in another one, 
and shinning through the dark for the lean-to. i couldn't hardly get my 
words out, i was so anxious; but i told tom as quick as i could we must 
jump for it now, and not a minute to lose-the house full of men, yonder, 
with guns! 
his eyes just blazed; and he says: 
"no!-is that so? ain't it bully! why, huck, if it was to do over 
again, i bet i could fetch two hundred! if we could put it off till-" 
"hurry! hurry!" i says. "where's jim?" 
"right at your elbow; if you reach out your arm you can touch him. he's 
dressed, and everything's ready. now we'll slide out and give the 
sheep-signal." 
but then we heard the tramp of men coming to the door, and heard them 
begin to fumble with the pad-lock, and heard a man say: 
"i told you we'd be too soon; they haven't come-the door is locked. 
here, i'll lock some of you into the cabin, and you lay for 'em in the 
dark and kill 'em when they come; and the rest scatter around a piece, 
and listen if you can hear 'em coming." 
so in they come, but couldn't see us in the dark, and most trod on us 
whilst we was hustling to get under the bed. but we got under all right, 
and out through the hole, swift but soft-jim first, me next, and tom 
last, which was according to tom's orders. now we was in the lean-to, 
and heard trampings close by outside. so we crept to the door, and tom 
stopped us there and put his eye to the crack, but couldn't make out 
nothing, it was so dark; and whispered and said he would listen for the 
steps to get further, and when he nudged us jim must glide out first, and 
him last. so he set his ear to the crack and listened, and listened, and 
listened, and the steps a-scraping around out there all the time; and at 
last he nudged us, and we slid out, and stooped down, not breathing, and 
not making the least noise, and slipped stealthy towards the fence in 
injun file, and got to it all right, and me and jim over it; but tom's 
britches catched fast on a splinter on the top rail, and then he hear the 
steps coming, so he had to pull loose, which snapped the splinter and 
made a noise; and as he dropped in our tracks and started somebody sings 
out: 
"who's that? answer, or i'll shoot!" 
but we didn't answer; we just unfurled our heels and shoved. then there 
was a rush, and a bang, bang, bang! and the bullets fairly whizzed around 
us! we heard them sing out: 
"here they are! they've broke for the river! after 'em, boys, and turn 
loose the dogs!" 
so here they come, full tilt. we could hear them because they wore boots 
and yelled, but we didn't wear no boots and didn't yell. we was in the 
path to the mill; and when they got pretty close on to us we dodged into 
the bush and let them go by, and then dropped in behind them. they'd had 
all the dogs shut up, so they wouldn't scare off the robbers; but by this 
time somebody had let them loose, and here they come, making powwow 
enough for a million; but they was our dogs; so we stopped in our tracks 
till they catched up; and when they see it warn't nobody but us, and no 
excitement to offer them, they only just said howdy, and tore right ahead 
towards the shouting and clattering; and then we up-steam again, and 
whizzed along after them till we was nearly to the mill, and then struck 
up through the bush to where my canoe was tied, and hopped in and pulled 
for dear life towards the middle of the river, but didn't make no more 
noise than we was obleeged to. then we struck out, easy and comfortable, 
for the island where my raft was; and we could hear them yelling and 
barking at each other all up and down the bank, till we was so far away 
the sounds got dim and died out. and when we stepped on to the raft i 
says: 
"now, old jim, you're a free man again, and i bet you won't ever be a 
slave no more." 
"en a mighty good job it wuz, too, huck. it 'uz planned beautiful, en it 
'uz done beautiful; en dey ain't nobody kin git up a plan dat's mo' 
mixed-up en splendid den what dat one wuz." 
we was all glad as we could be, but tom was the gladdest of all because 
he had a bullet in the calf of his leg. 
when me and jim heard that we didn't feel so brash as what we did before. 
it was hurting him considerable, and bleeding; so we laid him in the 
wigwam and tore up one of the duke's shirts for to bandage him, but he 
says: 
"gimme the rags; i can do it myself. don't stop now; don't fool around 
here, and the evasion booming along so handsome; man the sweeps, and set 
her loose! boys, we done it elegant!-'deed we did. i wish we'd a had 
the handling of louis xvi., there wouldn't a been no 'son of saint louis, 
ascend to heaven!' wrote down in his biography; no, sir, we'd a whooped 
him over the border-that's what we'd a done with him-and done it just 
as slick as nothing at all, too. man the sweeps-man the sweeps!" 
but me and jim was consulting-and thinking. and after we'd thought a 
minute, i says: 
"say it, jim." 
so he says: 
"well, den, dis is de way it look to me, huck. ef it wuz him dat 'uz 
bein' sot free, en one er de boys wuz to git shot, would he say, 'go on 
en save me, nemmine 'bout a doctor f'r to save dis one?' is dat like 
mars tom sawyer? would he say dat? you bet he wouldn't! well, den, is 
jim gywne to say it? no, sah-i doan' budge a step out'n dis place 'dout 
a doctor, not if it's forty year!" 
i knowed he was white inside, and i reckoned he'd say what he did say-so 
it was all right now, and i told tom i was a-going for a doctor. he 
raised considerable row about it, but me and jim stuck to it and wouldn't 
budge; so he was for crawling out and setting the raft loose himself; but 
we wouldn't let him. then he give us a piece of his mind, but it didn't 
do no good. 
so when he sees me getting the canoe ready, he says: 
"well, then, if you re bound to go, i'll tell you the way to do when you 
get to the village. shut the door and blindfold the doctor tight and 
fast, and make him swear to be silent as the grave, and put a purse full 
of gold in his hand, and then take and lead him all around the back 
alleys and everywheres in the dark, and then fetch him here in the canoe, 
in a roundabout way amongst the islands, and search him and take his 
chalk away from him, and don't give it back to him till you get him back 
to the village, or else he will chalk this raft so he can find it again. 
it's the way they all do." 
so i said i would, and left, and jim was to hide in the woods when he see 
the doctor coming till he was gone again. 
chapter xli. 
the doctor was an old man; a very nice, kind-looking old man when i got 
him up. i told him me and my brother was over on spanish island hunting 
yesterday afternoon, and camped on a piece of a raft we found, and about 
midnight he must a kicked his gun in his dreams, for it went off and shot 
him in the leg, and we wanted him to go over there and fix it and not say 
nothing about it, nor let anybody know, because we wanted to come home 
this evening and surprise the folks. 
"who is your folks?" he says. 
"the phelpses, down yonder." 
"oh," he says. and after a minute, he says: 
"how'd you say he got shot?" 
"he had a dream," i says, "and it shot him." 
"singular dream," he says. 
so he lit up his lantern, and got his saddle-bags, and we started. but 
when he sees the canoe he didn't like the look of her-said she was big 
enough for one, but didn't look pretty safe for two. i says: 
"oh, you needn't be afeard, sir, she carried the three of us easy 
enough." 
"what three?" 
"why, me and sid, and-and-and the guns; that's what i mean." 
"oh," he says. 
but he put his foot on the gunnel and rocked her, and shook his head, and 
said he reckoned he'd look around for a bigger one. but they was all 
locked and chained; so he took my canoe, and said for me to wait till he 
come back, or i could hunt around further, or maybe i better go down home 
and get them ready for the surprise if i wanted to. but i said i didn't; 
so i told him just how to find the raft, and then he started. 
i struck an idea pretty soon. i says to myself, spos'n he can't fix that 
leg just in three shakes of a sheep's tail, as the saying is? spos'n it 
takes him three or four days? what are we going to do?-lay around there 
till he lets the cat out of the bag? no, sir; i know what i'll do. i'll 
wait, and when he comes back if he says he's got to go any more i'll get 
down there, too, if i swim; and we'll take and tie him, and keep him, and 
shove out down the river; and when tom's done with him we'll give him 
what it's worth, or all we got, and then let him get ashore. 
so then i crept into a lumber-pile to get some sleep; and next time i 
waked up the sun was away up over my head! i shot out and went for the 
doctor's house, but they told me he'd gone away in the night some time or 
other, and warn't back yet. well, thinks i, that looks powerful bad for 
tom, and i'll dig out for the island right off. so away i shoved, and 
turned the corner, and nearly rammed my head into uncle silas's stomach! 
he says: 
"why, tom! where you been all this time, you rascal?" 
"i hain't been nowheres," i says, "only just hunting for the runaway 
nigger-me and sid." 
"why, where ever did you go?" he says. "your aunt's been mighty uneasy." 
"she needn't," i says, "because we was all right. we followed the men 
and the dogs, but they outrun us, and we lost them; but we thought we 
heard them on the water, so we got a canoe and took out after them and 
crossed over, but couldn't find nothing of them; so we cruised along 
up-shore till we got kind of tired and beat out; and tied up the canoe 
and went to sleep, and never waked up till about an hour ago; then we 
paddled over here to hear the news, and sid's at the post-office to see 
what he can hear, and i'm a-branching out to get something to eat for us, 
and then we're going home." 
so then we went to the post-office to get "sid"; but just as i 
suspicioned, he warn't there; so the old man he got a letter out of the 
office, and we waited awhile longer, but sid didn't come; so the old man 
said, come along, let sid foot it home, or canoe it, when he got done 
fooling around-but we would ride. i couldn't get him to let me stay and 
wait for sid; and he said there warn't no use in it, and i must come 
along, and let aunt sally see we was all right. 
when we got home aunt sally was that glad to see me she laughed and cried 
both, and hugged me, and give me one of them lickings of hern that don't 
amount to shucks, and said she'd serve sid the same when he come. 
and the place was plum full of farmers and farmers' wives, to dinner; and 
such another clack a body never heard. old mrs. hotchkiss was the worst; 
her tongue was a-going all the time. she says: 
"well, sister phelps, i've ransacked that-air cabin over, an' i b'lieve 
the nigger was crazy. i says to sister damrell-didn't i, sister 
damrell?-s'i, he's crazy, s'i-them's the very words i said. you all 
hearn me: he's crazy, s'i; everything shows it, s'i. look at that-air 
grindstone, s'i; want to tell me't any cretur 't's in his right mind 's a 
goin' to scrabble all them crazy things onto a grindstone, s'i? here 
sich 'n' sich a person busted his heart; 'n' here so 'n' so pegged along 
for thirty-seven year, 'n' all that-natcherl son o' louis somebody, 'n' 
sich everlast'n rubbage. he's plumb crazy, s'i; it's what i says in the 
fust place, it's what i says in the middle, 'n' it's what i says last 'n' 
all the time-the nigger's crazy-crazy 's nebokoodneezer, s'i." 
"an' look at that-air ladder made out'n rags, sister hotchkiss," says old 
mrs. damrell; "what in the name o' goodness could he ever want of-" 
"the very words i was a-sayin' no longer ago th'n this minute to sister 
utterback, 'n' she'll tell you so herself. sh-she, look at that-air rag 
ladder, sh-she; 'n' s'i, yes, look at it, s'i-what could he a-wanted of 
it, s'i. sh-she, sister hotchkiss, sh-she-" 
"but how in the nation'd they ever git that grindstone in there, anyway? 
'n' who dug that-air hole? 'n' who-" 
"my very words, brer penrod! i was a-sayin'-pass that-air sasser o' 
m'lasses, won't ye?-i was a-sayin' to sister dunlap, jist this minute, 
how did they git that grindstone in there, s'i. without help, mind you 
'thout help! that's wher 'tis. don't tell me, s'i; there wuz help, 
s'i; 'n' ther' wuz a plenty help, too, s'i; ther's ben a dozen a-helpin' 
that nigger, 'n' i lay i'd skin every last nigger on this place but i'd 
find out who done it, s'i; 'n' moreover, s'i-" 
"a dozen says you!-forty couldn't a done every thing that's been done. 
look at them case-knife saws and things, how tedious they've been made; 
look at that bed-leg sawed off with 'm, a week's work for six men; look 
at that nigger made out'n straw on the bed; and look at-" 
"you may well say it, brer hightower! it's jist as i was a-sayin' to 
brer phelps, his own self. s'e, what do you think of it, sister 
hotchkiss, s'e? think o' what, brer phelps, s'i? think o' that bed-leg 
sawed off that a way, s'e? think of it, s'i? i lay it never sawed 
itself off, s'i-somebody sawed it, s'i; that's my opinion, take it or 
leave it, it mayn't be no 'count, s'i, but sich as 't is, it's my 
opinion, s'i, 'n' if any body k'n start a better one, s'i, let him do it, 
s'i, that's all. i says to sister dunlap, s'i-" 
"why, dog my cats, they must a ben a house-full o' niggers in there every 
night for four weeks to a done all that work, sister phelps. look at 
that shirt-every last inch of it kivered over with secret african writ'n 
done with blood! must a ben a raft uv 'm at it right along, all the 
time, amost. why, i'd give two dollars to have it read to me; 'n' as for 
the niggers that wrote it, i 'low i'd take 'n' lash 'm t'll-" 
"people to help him, brother marples! well, i reckon you'd think so if 
you'd a been in this house for a while back. why, they've stole 
everything they could lay their hands on-and we a-watching all the time, 
mind you. they stole that shirt right off o' the line! and as for that 
sheet they made the rag ladder out of, ther' ain't no telling how many 
times they didn't steal that; and flour, and candles, and candlesticks, 
and spoons, and the old warming-pan, and most a thousand things that i 
disremember now, and my new calico dress; and me and silas and my sid and 
tom on the constant watch day and night, as i was a-telling you, and not 
a one of us could catch hide nor hair nor sight nor sound of them; and 
here at the last minute, lo and behold you, they slides right in under 
our noses and fools us, and not only fools us but the injun territory 
robbers too, and actuly gets away with that nigger safe and sound, and 
that with sixteen men and twenty-two dogs right on their very heels at 
that very time! i tell you, it just bangs anything i ever heard of. 
why, sperits couldn't a done better and been no smarter. and i reckon 
they must a been sperits-because, you know our dogs, and ther' ain't no 
better; well, them dogs never even got on the track of 'm once! you 
explain that to me if you can!-any of you!" 
"well, it does beat-" 
"laws alive, i never-" 
"so help me, i wouldn't a be-" 
"house-thieves as well as-" 
"goodnessgracioussakes, i'd a ben afeard to live in sich a-" 
"'fraid to live!-why, i was that scared i dasn't hardly go to bed, or 
get up, or lay down, or set down, sister ridgeway. why, they'd steal the 
very-why, goodness sakes, you can guess what kind of a fluster i was 
in by the time midnight come last night. i hope to gracious if i warn't 
afraid they'd steal some o' the family! i was just to that pass i didn't 
have no reasoning faculties no more. it looks foolish enough now, in the 
daytime; but i says to myself, there's my two poor boys asleep, 'way up 
stairs in that lonesome room, and i declare to goodness i was that uneasy 
't i crep' up there and locked 'em in! i did. and anybody would. 
because, you know, when you get scared that way, and it keeps running on, 
and getting worse and worse all the time, and your wits gets to addling, 
and you get to doing all sorts o' wild things, and by and by you think to 
yourself, spos'n i was a boy, and was away up there, and the door ain't 
locked, and you-" she stopped, looking kind of wondering, and then she 
turned her head around slow, and when her eye lit on me-i got up and 
took a walk. 
says i to myself, i can explain better how we come to not be in that room 
this morning if i go out to one side and study over it a little. so i 
done it. but i dasn't go fur, or she'd a sent for me. and when it was 
late in the day the people all went, and then i come in and told her the 
noise and shooting waked up me and "sid," and the door was locked, and we 
wanted to see the fun, so we went down the lightning-rod, and both of us 
got hurt a little, and we didn't never want to try that no more. and 
then i went on and told her all what i told uncle silas before; and then 
she said she'd forgive us, and maybe it was all right enough anyway, and 
about what a body might expect of boys, for all boys was a pretty 
harum-scarum lot as fur as she could see; and so, as long as no harm 
hadn't come of it, she judged she better put in her time being grateful 
we was alive and well and she had us still, stead of fretting over what 
was past and done. so then she kissed me, and patted me on the head, and 
dropped into a kind of a brown study; and pretty soon jumps up, and says: 
"why, lawsamercy, it's most night, and sid not come yet! what has become 
of that boy?" 
i see my chance; so i skips up and says: 
"i'll run right up to town and get him," i says. 
"no you won't," she says. "you'll stay right wher' you are; one's enough 
to be lost at a time. if he ain't here to supper, your uncle 'll go." 
well, he warn't there to supper; so right after supper uncle went. 
he come back about ten a little bit uneasy; hadn't run across tom's 
track. aunt sally was a good deal uneasy; but uncle silas he said there 
warn't no occasion to be-boys will be boys, he said, and you'll see this 
one turn up in the morning all sound and right. so she had to be 
satisfied. but she said she'd set up for him a while anyway, and keep a 
light burning so he could see it. 
and then when i went up to bed she come up with me and fetched her 
candle, and tucked me in, and mothered me so good i felt mean, and like i 
couldn't look her in the face; and she set down on the bed and talked 
with me a long time, and said what a splendid boy sid was, and didn't 
seem to want to ever stop talking about him; and kept asking me every now 
and then if i reckoned he could a got lost, or hurt, or maybe drownded, 
and might be laying at this minute somewheres suffering or dead, and she 
not by him to help him, and so the tears would drip down silent, and i 
would tell her that sid was all right, and would be home in the morning, 
sure; and she would squeeze my hand, or maybe kiss me, and tell me to say 
it again, and keep on saying it, because it done her good, and she was in 
so much trouble. and when she was going away she looked down in my eyes 
so steady and gentle, and says: 
"the door ain't going to be locked, tom, and there's the window and the 
rod; but you'll be good, won't you? and you won't go? for my sake." 
laws knows i wanted to go bad enough to see about tom, and was all 
intending to go; but after that i wouldn't a went, not for kingdoms. 
but she was on my mind and tom was on my mind, so i slept very restless. 
and twice i went down the rod away in the night, and slipped around 
front, and see her setting there by her candle in the window with her 
eyes towards the road and the tears in them; and i wished i could do 
something for her, but i couldn't, only to swear that i wouldn't never do 
nothing to grieve her any more. and the third time i waked up at dawn, 
and slid down, and she was there yet, and her candle was most out, and 
her old gray head was resting on her hand, and she was asleep. 
chapter xlii. 
the old man was uptown again before breakfast, but couldn't get no track 
of tom; and both of them set at the table thinking, and not saying 
nothing, and looking mournful, and their coffee getting cold, and not 
eating anything. and by and by the old man says: 
"did i give you the letter?" 
"what letter?" 
"the one i got yesterday out of the post-office." 
"no, you didn't give me no letter." 
"well, i must a forgot it." 
so he rummaged his pockets, and then went off somewheres where he had 
laid it down, and fetched it, and give it to her. she says: 
"why, it's from st. petersburg-it's from sis." 
i allowed another walk would do me good; but i couldn't stir. but before 
she could break it open she dropped it and run-for she see something. 
and so did i. it was tom sawyer on a mattress; and that old doctor; and 
jim, in her calico dress, with his hands tied behind him; and a lot of 
people. i hid the letter behind the first thing that come handy, and 
rushed. she flung herself at tom, crying, and says: 
"oh, he's dead, he's dead, i know he's dead!" 
and tom he turned his head a little, and muttered something or other, 
which showed he warn't in his right mind; then she flung up her hands, 
and says: 
"he's alive, thank god! and that's enough!" and she snatched a kiss of 
him, and flew for the house to get the bed ready, and scattering orders 
right and left at the niggers and everybody else, as fast as her tongue 
could go, every jump of the way. 
i followed the men to see what they was going to do with jim; and the old 
doctor and uncle silas followed after tom into the house. the men was 
very huffy, and some of them wanted to hang jim for an example to all the 
other niggers around there, so they wouldn't be trying to run away like 
jim done, and making such a raft of trouble, and keeping a whole family 
scared most to death for days and nights. but the others said, don't do 
it, it wouldn't answer at all; he ain't our nigger, and his owner would 
turn up and make us pay for him, sure. so that cooled them down a 
little, because the people that's always the most anxious for to hang a 
nigger that hain't done just right is always the very ones that ain't the 
most anxious to pay for him when they've got their satisfaction out of 
him. 
they cussed jim considerble, though, and give him a cuff or two side the 
head once in a while, but jim never said nothing, and he never let on to 
know me, and they took him to the same cabin, and put his own clothes on 
him, and chained him again, and not to no bed-leg this time, but to a big 
staple drove into the bottom log, and chained his hands, too, and both 
legs, and said he warn't to have nothing but bread and water to eat after 
this till his owner come, or he was sold at auction because he didn't 
come in a certain length of time, and filled up our hole, and said a 
couple of farmers with guns must stand watch around about the cabin every 
night, and a bulldog tied to the door in the daytime; and about this time 
they was through with the job and was tapering off with a kind of generl 
good-bye cussing, and then the old doctor comes and takes a look, and 
says: 
"don't be no rougher on him than you're obleeged to, because he ain't a 
bad nigger. when i got to where i found the boy i see i couldn't cut the 
bullet out without some help, and he warn't in no condition for me to 
leave to go and get help; and he got a little worse and a little worse, 
and after a long time he went out of his head, and wouldn't let me come 
a-nigh him any more, and said if i chalked his raft he'd kill me, and no 
end of wild foolishness like that, and i see i couldn't do anything at 
all with him; so i says, i got to have help somehow; and the minute i 
says it out crawls this nigger from somewheres and says he'll help, and 
he done it, too, and done it very well. of course i judged he must be a 
runaway nigger, and there i was! and there i had to stick right straight 
along all the rest of the day and all night. it was a fix, i tell you! 
i had a couple of patients with the chills, and of course i'd of liked to 
run up to town and see them, but i dasn't, because the nigger might get 
away, and then i'd be to blame; and yet never a skiff come close enough 
for me to hail. so there i had to stick plumb until daylight this 
morning; and i never see a nigger that was a better nuss or faithfuller, 
and yet he was risking his freedom to do it, and was all tired out, too, 
and i see plain enough he'd been worked main hard lately. i liked the 
nigger for that; i tell you, gentlemen, a nigger like that is worth a 
thousand dollars-and kind treatment, too. i had everything i needed, 
and the boy was doing as well there as he would a done at home-better, 
maybe, because it was so quiet; but there i was, with both of 'm on my 
hands, and there i had to stick till about dawn this morning; then some 
men in a skiff come by, and as good luck would have it the nigger was 
setting by the pallet with his head propped on his knees sound asleep; so 
i motioned them in quiet, and they slipped up on him and grabbed him and 
tied him before he knowed what he was about, and we never had no trouble. 
and the boy being in a kind of a flighty sleep, too, we muffled the oars 
and hitched the raft on, and towed her over very nice and quiet, and the 
nigger never made the least row nor said a word from the start. he ain't 
no bad nigger, gentlemen; that's what i think about him." 
somebody says: 
"well, it sounds very good, doctor, i'm obleeged to say." 
then the others softened up a little, too, and i was mighty thankful to 
that old doctor for doing jim that good turn; and i was glad it was 
according to my judgment of him, too; because i thought he had a good 
heart in him and was a good man the first time i see him. then they all 
agreed that jim had acted very well, and was deserving to have some 
notice took of it, and reward. so every one of them promised, right out 
and hearty, that they wouldn't cuss him no more. 
then they come out and locked him up. i hoped they was going to say he 
could have one or two of the chains took off, because they was rotten 
heavy, or could have meat and greens with his bread and water; but they 
didn't think of it, and i reckoned it warn't best for me to mix in, but i 
judged i'd get the doctor's yarn to aunt sally somehow or other as soon 
as i'd got through the breakers that was laying just ahead of me 
explanations, i mean, of how i forgot to mention about sid being shot 
when i was telling how him and me put in that dratted night paddling 
around hunting the runaway nigger. 
but i had plenty time. aunt sally she stuck to the sick-room all day and 
all night, and every time i see uncle silas mooning around i dodged him. 
next morning i heard tom was a good deal better, and they said aunt sally 
was gone to get a nap. so i slips to the sick-room, and if i found him 
awake i reckoned we could put up a yarn for the family that would wash. 
but he was sleeping, and sleeping very peaceful, too; and pale, not 
fire-faced the way he was when he come. so i set down and laid for him 
to wake. in about half an hour aunt sally comes gliding in, and there i 
was, up a stump again! she motioned me to be still, and set down by me, 
and begun to whisper, and said we could all be joyful now, because all 
the symptoms was first-rate, and he'd been sleeping like that for ever so 
long, and looking better and peacefuller all the time, and ten to one 
he'd wake up in his right mind. 
so we set there watching, and by and by he stirs a bit, and opened his 
eyes very natural, and takes a look, and says: 
"hello!-why, i'm at home! how's that? where's the raft?" 
"it's all right," i says. 
"and jim?" 
"the same," i says, but couldn't say it pretty brash. but he never 
noticed, but says: 
"good! splendid! now we're all right and safe! did you tell aunty?" 
i was going to say yes; but she chipped in and says: "about what, sid?" 
"why, about the way the whole thing was done." 
"what whole thing?" 
"why, the whole thing. there ain't but one; how we set the runaway 
nigger free-me and tom." 
"good land! set the run-what is the child talking about! dear, dear, 
out of his head again!" 
"no, i ain't out of my head; i know all what i'm talking about. we did 
set him free-me and tom. we laid out to do it, and we done it. and we 
done it elegant, too." he'd got a start, and she never checked him up, 
just set and stared and stared, and let him clip along, and i see it 
warn't no use for me to put in. "why, aunty, it cost us a power of work 
weeks of it-hours and hours, every night, whilst you was all asleep. 
and we had to steal candles, and the sheet, and the shirt, and your 
dress, and spoons, and tin plates, and case-knives, and the warming-pan, 
and the grindstone, and flour, and just no end of things, and you can't 
think what work it was to make the saws, and pens, and inscriptions, and 
one thing or another, and you can't think half the fun it was. and we 
had to make up the pictures of coffins and things, and nonnamous letters 
from the robbers, and get up and down the lightning-rod, and dig the hole 
into the cabin, and made the rope ladder and send it in cooked up in a 
pie, and send in spoons and things to work with in your apron pocket-" 
"mercy sakes!" 
"-and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so on, for company for 
jim; and then you kept tom here so long with the butter in his hat that 
you come near spiling the whole business, because the men come before we 
was out of the cabin, and we had to rush, and they heard us and let drive 
at us, and i got my share, and we dodged out of the path and let them go 
by, and when the dogs come they warn't interested in us, but went for the 
most noise, and we got our canoe, and made for the raft, and was all 
safe, and jim was a free man, and we done it all by ourselves, and wasn't 
it bully, aunty!" 
"well, i never heard the likes of it in all my born days! so it was you, 
you little rapscallions, that's been making all this trouble, and turned 
everybody's wits clean inside out and scared us all most to death. i've 
as good a notion as ever i had in my life to take it out o' you this very 
minute. to think, here i've been, night after night, a-you just get 
well once, you young scamp, and i lay i'll tan the old harry out o' both 
o' ye!" 
but tom, he was so proud and joyful, he just couldn't hold in, and his 
tongue just went it-she a-chipping in, and spitting fire all along, and 
both of them going it at once, like a cat convention; and she says: 
"well, you get all the enjoyment you can out of it now, for mind i tell 
you if i catch you meddling with him again-" 
"meddling with who?" tom says, dropping his smile and looking surprised. 
"with who? why, the runaway nigger, of course. who'd you reckon?" 
tom looks at me very grave, and says: 
"tom, didn't you just tell me he was all right? hasn't he got away?" 
"him?" says aunt sally; "the runaway nigger? 'deed he hasn't. they've 
got him back, safe and sound, and he's in that cabin again, on bread and 

const int mod = 998'244'353
vi lcm convolution(const vi& a, const vi& b) {
	int n = sz(a)
	vector<ll> sum a(n), sum b(n)
	vi c(n)
	rep(i, 1, n) {
		for (int j = i; j < n; j += i)
			sum a[j] += a[i], sum b[j] += b[i]
		sum a[i] %= mod, sum b[i] %= mod
		c[i] = (c[i] + sum a[i] * sum b[i]) % mod
		for (int j = i + i; j < n; j += i)
			if ((c[j] -= c[i]) < 0) c[j] += mod
	}
	return c
}

vi min plus(const vi& convex, const vi& arbitrary) {
	int n = sz(convex)
	int m = sz(arbitrary)
	vi res(n + m - 1, int max)
	auto dnc = [&](auto&& self, int res le, int res ri,
	int arb le, int arb ri) -> void {
		if (res le >= res ri) return
		int mid res = (res le + res ri) / 2
		int op arb = arb le
		rep(i, arb le, min(mid res + 1, arb ri)) {
			int j = mid res - i
			if (j >= n) continue
			if (res[mid res] > convex[j] + arbitrary[i]) {
				res[mid res] = convex[j] + arbitrary[i]
				op arb = i
			}
		}
		self(self, res le, mid res, arb le,
				 min(arb ri, op arb + 1))
		self(self, mid res + 1, res ri, op arb, arb ri)
	}
	dnc(dnc, 0, n + m - 1, 0, m)
	return res
}

const int mod = 998'244'353
vi gcd convolution(const vi& a, const vi& b) {
	int n = sz(a)
	vi c(n)
	for (int g = n - 1; g >= 1; g--) {
		ll sum a = 0, sum b = 0
		for (int i = g; i < n; i += g) {
			sum a += a[i], sum b += b[i]
			if ((c[g] -= c[i]) < 0) c[g] += mod
		}
		sum a %= mod, sum b %= mod
		c[g] = (c[g] + sum a * sum b) % mod
	}
	return c
}

for (int mask = (1 << k) - 1; mask < (1 << n)
		 mask = next subset(mask))

	for (ll le = 1, ri; le <= n && (ri = n / (n / le))
			 le = ri + 1)

		int next subset(int mask) {
		int c = mask & -mask, r = mask + c
		return r | (((r ^ mask) >> 2) / c)
	}

for (int supermask = mask; supermask < (1 << n)
		 supermask = (supermask + 1) | mask)

	for (int submask = mask; submask
			 submask = (submask - 1) & mask)

		vector<ll> derangements(int n, int mod) {
		vector<ll> dp(n)
		dp[0] = 1
		rep(i, 2, n) dp[i] =
			(i - 1) * (dp[i - 1] + dp[i - 2]) % mod
		return dp
	}

const int mod = 998244353
struct mint {
	int x
	mint(int xx = 0): x(xx < 0 ? xx + mod : xx) {}
	mint operator+(mint b) {
		return x - mod + b.x
	}
	mint operator-(mint b) {
		return x - b.x
	}
	mint operator*(mint b) {
		return ll(x) * b.x % mod
	}
	mint operator/(mint b) {
		int m = mod, u = 1, v = 0
		while (m)
			u = exchange(v, u - b.x / m * v),
			b.x = exchange(m, b.x % m)
		assert(b.x == 1)
		return *this * u
	}
}

const int mod = 998'244'353
array<ll, 2> fib(ll n) {
	if (n == 0) return {0ll, 1ll}
	auto [x, y] = fib(n >> 1)
	ll c = x * (2 * y - x + mod) % mod,
		 d = (x * x + y * y) % mod
	if (n & 1) return {d, (c + d) % mod}
	return {c, d}
}

const int mod = 998'244'353
vector<ll> partitions(int n) {
	vector<ll> dp(n, 1)
	rep(i, 1, n) {
		ll sum = 0
		for (int j = 1, pent = 1, sign = 1; pent <= i
				 j++, pent += 3 * j - 2, sign = -sign) {
			if (pent + j <= i)
				sum += dp[i - pent - j] * sign + mod
			sum += dp[i - pent] * sign + mod
		}
		dp[i] = sum % mod
	}
	return dp
}

template<class t>
vector<vector<t>> operator*(const vector<vector<t>>& a,
														const vector<vector<t>>& b) {
	int n = sz(a), m = sz(b[0]), inner = sz(b)
	vector<vector<t>> c(n, vector<t>(m))
	rep(i, 0, n) rep(k, 0, inner) rep(j, 0, m) c[i][j] +=
		a[i][k] * b[k][j]
	return c
}

template<class t>
basis<t> intersection(const basis<t>& u,
											const basis<t>& v) {
	vector<array<t, 2>> w(sz(u.b))
	rep(i, 0, sz(w)) w[i] = {u.b[i], u.b[i]}
	basis<t> res
	for (t e : v.b) {
		t s = 0
		for (auto [x, y] : w)
			if ((e ^ x) < e) e ^= x, s ^= y
		if (e) w.push back({e, s})
		else res.insert(s)
	}
	return res
}

struct solve linear mod {
	int rank
	mint det
	vector<mint> sol
	solve linear mod(vector<vector<mint>>& mat,
									 const vector<mint>& rhs) {
		int n = sz(mat), m = sz(mat[0])
		rep(i, 0, n) mat[i].push back(rhs[i])
		tie(rank, det) = row reduce(mat, m)
		if (any of(rank + all(mat),
		[](auto& v) {
		return v.back().x
		})) {
			return
		}
		sol.resize(m)
		int j = 0
		for each(begin(mat), begin(mat) + rank, [&](auto& v) {
			while (v[j].x == 0) j++
			sol[j] = v.back()
		})
	}
}

using ui = unsigned long int
template<ui n, ui m, ui k>
array<bitset<k>, n> operator*(const array<bitset<m>, n>& a,
															const array<bitset<k>, m>& b) {
	array<bitset<k>, n> c
	rep(i, 0, int(n)) rep(j, 0, int(m)) if (a[i][j]) c[i] ^=
			b[j]
	return c
}

const int lg = 60
template<class t> struct basis ordered {
	t b[lg] {}
	int siz = 0
	int shrink(t& v) {
		for (int i = lg - 1; i >= 0; i--)
			if (((v >> i) & t(1)) != t(0)) {
				if (b[i] == t(0)) return i
				v ^= b[i]
			}
		return -1
	}
	bool insert(t v) {
		int i = shrink(v)
		return i >= 0 ? b[i] = v, ++siz : 0
	}
}

pair<int, mint> row reduce(vector<vector<mint>>& mat,
													 int cols) {
	int n = sz(mat), m = sz(mat[0]), rank = 0
	mint det = 1
	for (int col = 0; col < cols && rank < n; col++) {
		auto it = find if(rank + all(mat),
		[&](auto& v) {
			return v[col].x
		})
		if (it == end(mat)) {
			det = 0
			continue
		}
		if (it != begin(mat) + rank) {
			det = mint(0) - det
			iter swap(begin(mat) + rank, it)
		}
		det = det * mat[rank][col]
		mint a inv = mint(1) / mat[rank][col]
		for (mint& num : mat[rank]) num = num * a inv
		rep(i, 0, n) if (i != rank && mat[i][col].x != 0) {
			mint num = mat[i][col]
			rep(j, 0, m) mat[i][j] =
				mat[i][j] - mat[rank][j] * num
		}
		rank++
	}
	return {rank, det}
}

template<class t> struct basis {
	vector<t> b
	t shrink(t v) {
		for (t x : b) v = min(v, v ^ x)
		return v
	}
	bool insert(t v) {
		return (v = shrink(v)) ? b.push back(v), 1 : 0
	}
}

array<vl, 2> get right and top(vl left, vl bottom) {
	array<vl, 2> ret
	for (vl& res : ret) {
		{
			vl tr(sz(left))
			rep(i, 0, sz(tr)) tr[i] = c(i + sz(bottom) - 1, i)
			res = conv(left, tr)
			res.resize(sz(left))
		}
		{
			vl tr(sz(left) + sz(bottom))
			grow(sz(tr))
			rep(i, 0, sz(tr)) tr[i] = t[i].fact
			vl dp(sz(bottom))
			rep(i, 0, sz(dp)) dp[i] =
				bottom[i] * t[sz(dp) - 1 - i].inv fact % mod
			vl tmp res = conv(dp, tr)
			rep(i, 0, sz(res)) res[i] =
				(res[i] +
				 tmp res[i + sz(bottom) - 1] * t[i].inv fact) %
				mod
		}
		swap(left, bottom)
	}
	return ret
}

vl divide and conquer(vl h, vl bottom) {
	{
		int start =
		find if(all(h), [](ll x) {
			return x
		}) - begin(h)
		h.erase(begin(h), begin(h) + start)
		bottom.erase(begin(bottom), begin(bottom) + start)
	}
	int n = sz(h)
	if (n == 0) return {}
	if (n == 1) return vl(h[0], bottom[0])
	int mid = n / 2
	auto rect left =
		divide and conquer(vl(begin(h), begin(h) + mid),
											 vl(begin(bottom), begin(bottom) + mid))
	auto [rect right, rect top] =
		get right and top(rect left, vl(mid + all(bottom)))
	vl h right(mid + all(h))
	for (ll& hh : h right) hh -= h[mid - 1]
	auto upper right = divide and conquer(h right, rect top)
	rect right.insert(end(rect right), all(upper right))
	return rect right
}

int totient(int n) {
	int res = n
	for (int i = 2; i * i <= n; i++)
		if (n % i == 0) {
			while (n % i == 0) n /= i
			res -= res / i
		}
	if (n > 1) res -= res / n
	return res
}

ll bin exp(ll b, ll e, int mod) {
	ll res = 1
	if ((b %= mod) < 0) b += mod
	for (; e; b = b * b % mod, e /= 2)
		if (e & 1) res = res * b % mod
	return res
}
ll tetration(ll b, ll e, int mod) {
	if (mod == 1) return 0
	if (b == 0) return (e + 1) % 2 % mod
	if (b == 1 || e == 0) return 1
	if (e == 1) return b % mod
	if (b == 2 && e == 2) return 4 % mod
	if (b == 2 && e == 3) return 16 % mod
	if (b == 3 && e == 2) return 27 % mod
	int t = totient(mod)
	ll exp = tetration(b, e - 1, t)
	return bin exp(b, exp + t, mod)
}

mint mpow(mint b, ll e) {
	mint res = 1
	for (; e; e /= 2, b = b * b)
		if (e & 1) res = res * b
	return res
}

ll c small k(ll n, int k) {
	if (k < 0 || n < k || (n %= mod) < k) return 0
	grow(k)
	ll res = t[k].inv fact
	rep(i, 0, k) res = res * (n - i) % mod
	return res
}

const int mod = 17
struct comb {
	ll inv = 1, fact = 1, inv fact = 1
}
vector<comb> t(2)
void grow(int n) {
	while (sz(t) <= n) {
		ll i = sz(t),
			 inv = mod - (mod / i) * t[mod % i].inv % mod
		t.push back({inv, i * t[i - 1].fact % mod,
								 inv * t[i - 1].inv fact % mod})
	}
}

ll lucas(ll n, ll k) {
	if (k < 0 || n < k) return 0
	ll res = 1
	for (; k && k < n && res; n /= mod, k /= mod)
		res = res * c(n % mod, k % mod) % mod
	return res
}

ll c(int n, int k) {
	if (k < 0 || n < k) return 0
	grow(n)
	return t[n].fact * t[k].inv fact % mod *
				 t[n - k].inv fact % mod
}

const int mod = 17
vector<vector<ll>> ch(1010)
rep(i, 0, sz(ch)) {
	ch[i].resize(i + 1, 1)
	rep(j, 1, i) ch[i][j] =
		(ch[i - 1][j] + ch[i - 1][j - 1]) % mod
}

int num subsequences(const vi& a, int mod) {
	vector dp(sz(a) + 1, 1)
	map<int, int> last
	rep(i, 0, sz(a)) {
		int& curr = dp[i + 1] = 2 * dp[i]
		if (curr >= mod) curr -= mod
		auto it = last.find(a[i])
		if (it != end(last)) {
			curr -= dp[it->second]
			if (curr < 0) curr += mod
			it->second = i
		} else last[a[i]] = i
	}
	return dp.back()
}

vi sieve(1001)
iota(all(sieve), 0)
for (int i = 2; i * i < sz(sieve); i++)
	if (sieve[i] == i)
		for (int j = i * i; j < sz(sieve); j += i)
			sieve[j] = min(sieve[j], i)

for (int left = num, fac = sieve[left]; left > 1
		 fac = sieve[left /= fac])

	vi primes, sieve(1001)
iota(all(sieve), 0)
rep(i, 2, sz(sieve)) {
	if (sieve[i] == i) primes.push back(i)
	for (int prime : primes) {
		if (prime * i >= sz(sieve)) break
		sieve[prime * i] = prime
		if (i % prime == 0) break
	}
}

auto is prime = [&](int num) -> bool {
	return num >= 2 && sieve[num] == num
}

vi mobius(1'000'005)
mobius[1] = 1
rep(i, 1, sz(mobius)) for (int j = i + i; j < sz(mobius)
													 j += i) mobius[j] -= mobius[i]

template<class t> struct pal query {
	vi man
	pal query(const t& s): man(manacher(s)) {}
	bool is pal(int le, int ri) {
		return man[le + ri] <= le
	}
}

template<class t> vi manacher(const t& s) {
	int n = sz(s), p = 0
	vi man(max(0, 2 * n - 1))
	rep(i, 0, 2 * n - 1) {
		int ri = i <= 2 * (p - man[p])
						 ? p - max(man[2 * p - i], man[p])
						 : i / 2
		man[i] = i - ri
		while (man[i] > 0 && ri + 1 < n &&
					 s[man[i] - 1] == s[ri + 1])
			man[i]--, ri++, p = i
	}
	return man
}

template<class t> struct longest pal query {
	vi man, idx
	rmq<int, function<int(int, int)>> rmq = {{}, nullptr}
	longest pal query(const t& s):
		man(manacher(s)), idx(sz(s)) {
		iota(all(idx), 1)
		vi init(sz(man))
		iota(all(init), 0)
		rmq = {init, [&](int i1, int i2) {
			return len(i1) < len(i2) ? i2 : i1
		}
					}
	}
	int len(int i) {
		return i - 2 * man[i] + 1
	}
	pii longest pal(int le, int ri) {
		assert(le < ri)
		int pal len =
			lower bound(begin(idx), begin(idx) + (ri - le), 0,
		[&](int mid, int) {
			return len(rmq.query(2 * le + mid - 1,
													 2 * ri - mid)) >= mid
		}) -
		begin(idx)
		int best center =
			rmq.query(2 * le + pal len - 1, 2 * ri - pal len)
		return {(best center + 1 - pal len) / 2, pal len}
	}
}

ll sum consecutive(int le, int ri) {
	return ll(ri - le) * (le + ri - 1) / 2
}
template<class t> struct count pal query {
	int n
	vi man
	wavelet tree wt le, wt ri
	count pal query(const t& s):
		n(sz(s)), man(manacher(s)), wt le(man, 0, n),
		wt ri(init()) {}
	wavelet tree init() {
		vi right(sz(man))
		rep(i, 0, sz(man)) right[i] = i - man[i] + 1
		return {right, 1, n + 1}
	}
	ll count pals(int le, int ri) {
		assert(le < ri)
		int man le = 2 * le, man ri = 2 * ri - 1,
				man mi = (man le + man ri) / 2
		ll cnt =
			-1ll * wt le.rect count(man le, man mi, 0, le) * le
		cnt -= wt le.rect sum(man le, man mi, le, n)
		cnt += sum consecutive(le, man mi / 2) +
					 sum consecutive(le, (man mi + 1) / 2)
		cnt += man mi - man le
		cnt +=
			ll(wt ri.rect count(man mi, man ri, ri, n + 1)) * ri
		cnt += wt ri.rect sum(man mi, man ri, 1, ri)
		cnt -= sum consecutive((man mi + 1) / 2, ri) +
					 sum consecutive(man mi / 2 + 1, ri)
		return cnt
	}
}

template<class t> vi longest from index(pal query<t>& pq) {
	int n = (sz(pq.man) + 1) / 2
	vector longest(n, n - 1)
	for (int i = n - 2; i >= 0; i--) {
		longest[i] = min(longest[i + 1] + 1, n - 1)
		while (!pq.is pal(i, longest[i])) longest[i]--
	}
	return longest
}

template<class t> struct sa query {
	t s
	int n
	vi sa, sa inv, lcp
	rmq<int, function<int(int, int)>> rmq
	sa query(const t& a s, const array<vi, 3>& d):
		s(a s), n(sz(s)), sa(d[0]), sa inv(d[1]), lcp(d[2]),
		rmq(lcp, [](int x, int y) {
		return min(x, y)
	}) {}
	sa query(const t& a s, int max val):
		sa query(a s, get sa(a s, max val)) {}
	int len lcp(int i1, int i2) {
		if (i1 == i2) return n - i1
		auto [le, ri] = minmax(sa inv[i1], sa inv[i2])
		return rmq.query(le, ri)
	}
}

int cmp sufs(int le1, int le2) {
	return sa inv[le1] - sa inv[le2]
}

int cmp substrs(int le1, int ri1, int le2, int ri2) {
	int len1 = ri1 - le1, len2 = ri2 - le2
	return len lcp(le1, le2) >= min(len1, len2)
				 ? len1 - len2
				 : cmp sufs(le1, le2)
}

pii find substr(int s le, int s ri) {
	auto cmp = [&](int i, bool flip) -> bool {
		return flip ^ (len lcp(i, s le) < s ri - s le)
	}
	int le = lower bound(begin(sa), begin(sa) + sa inv[s le],
											 0, cmp) -
					 begin(sa)
	int ri =
		lower bound(sa inv[s le] + 1 + all(sa), 1, cmp) -
		begin(sa)
	return {le, ri}
}

struct match {
	int sa le, sa ri, s le, s ri
}

match find substrs concated(const vector<pii>& substrs) {
	using dt = array<int, 3>
	int sa le = 0, sa ri = n, s le = 0, s ri = 0,
			sum len = 0
	auto cmp = [&](int i, const dt& x) -> bool {
		int j = i + sum len,
		lcp len = j == n ? 0 : min(len lcp(j, x[0]), x[1])
		if (lcp len + sum len > s ri - s le)
			s le = i, s ri = j + lcp len
		if (lcp len < min(n - j, x[1]))
			return sa inv[j] - sa inv[x[0]] < x[2]
		return x[2] ^ (n - j < x[1])
	}
	for (auto [le, ri] : substrs) {
		sa le = lower bound(begin(sa) + sa le,
												begin(sa) + sa ri, dt{le, ri - le, 0}, cmp) -
						begin(sa)
		sa ri = lower bound(begin(sa) + sa le,
												begin(sa) + sa ri, dt{le, ri - le, 1}, cmp) -
						begin(sa)
		sum len += ri - le
	}
	return {sa le, sa ri, s le, s ri}
}

pii find str(const t& t) {
	int le =
		lower bound(all(sa), 0,
	[&](int i, int) -> bool {
		return lexicographical compare(i + all(s), all(t))
	}) -
	begin(sa)
	int ri = lower bound(le + all(sa), 0,
	[&](int i, int) -> bool {
		return mismatch(all(t), i + all(s)).first ==
		end(t)
	}) -
	begin(sa)
	return {le, ri}
}

match find str fast(const t& t) {
	int s le = n, s len = 0
	auto cmp = [&](int i, int) -> bool {
		if (int lcp len = s le == n ? 0 : len lcp(s le, i)
				lcp len != s len)
			return (lcp len < s len) ^ (cmp sufs(s le, i) < 0)
		auto [it s, it t] =
		mismatch(i + s len + all(s), s len + all(t))
		s le = i, s len = it t - begin(t)
		return lexicographical compare(it s, end(s), it t,
																	 end(t))
	}
	int sa le = lower bound(all(sa), 0, cmp) - begin(sa),
			sa ri = sa le
	if (s len == sz(t))
		sa ri = lower bound(sa le + all(sa), 0,
		[&](int i, int) -> bool {
		return len lcp(s le, i) >= sz(t)
	}) -
	begin(sa)
	return {sa le, sa ri, s le, s le + s len}
}

template<class t>
array<vi, 3> get sa(const t& s, int max num) {
	int n = sz(s)
	vi sa(n), sa inv(all(s)), lcp(max(0, n - 1))
	iota(all(sa), 0)
	for (int ln = 0; ln < n; ln = max(1, 2 * ln)) {
		vi tmp(n), freq(max num)
		iota(begin(tmp), begin(tmp) + ln, n - ln)
		copy if(all(sa), begin(tmp) + ln,
		[&](int& x) {
			return (x -= ln) >= 0
		})
		for (int x : sa inv) freq[x]++
		partial sum(all(freq), begin(freq))
		for each(rbegin(tmp), rend(tmp),
		[&](int x) {
			sa[--freq[sa inv[x]]] = x
		})
		swap(sa inv, tmp)
		max num = 1, sa inv[sa[0]] = 0
		auto prev inv = [&](int i) {
			return pair(tmp[i], i + ln < n ? tmp[i + ln] : -1)
		}
		rep(i, 1, n) {
			max num += prev inv(sa[i - 1]) != prev inv(sa[i])
			sa inv[sa[i]] = max num - 1
		}
		if (max num == n) break
	}
	int sz = 0
	rep(i, 0, n) {
		if (sz > 0) sz--
		if (sa inv[i] == 0) continue
		for (int j = sa[sa inv[i] - 1]
				 max(i, j) + sz < n && s[i + sz] == s[j + sz];)
			sz++
		lcp[sa inv[i] - 1] = sz
	}
	return {sa, sa inv, lcp}
}

int get child(int v, char c) {
	return v < sf a.n - 1 ? adj[v][c - mn] : -1
}

const int mn = '0',
					cnt let =
						36
struct lcp tree {
	sa query<string> sf a
	vi le, ri
	int root
	vector<vi> adj
	lcp tree(const string& s):
		sf a(s, mn + cnt let), le(mono st(sf a.lcp, less())),
		ri(mono range(le)),
		adj(max(sf a.n - 1, 0), vector(cnt let, -1)) {
		vi p = cart k ary tree(sf a.lcp, le)
		root = find(all(p), -1) - begin(p)
		auto node = [&](int i) -> int {
			return p[i] < i || sf a.lcp[i] != sf a.lcp[p[i]]
			? i
			: p[i]
		}
		rep(i, 0, sz(p)) if (node(i) == i && i != root)
			adj[p[i]][s[sf a.sa[i] + sf a.lcp[p[i]]] - mn] = i
		rep(i, 0, sf a.n) {
			int prev lcp = (i ? sf a.lcp[i - 1] : 0)
			int next lcp = (i < sz(sf a.lcp) ? sf a.lcp[i] : -1)
			int v = (prev lcp > next lcp) ? i - 1 : node(i)
			int idx = sf a.sa[i] + max(prev lcp, next lcp)
			if (v == -1 || idx == sf a.n) continue
			adj[v][s[idx] - mn] = sf a.n - 1 + i
		}
	}
}

int len lcp range(int v) {
	return v < sf a.n - 1 ? sf a.lcp[v]
				 : sf a.n - sf a.sa[v - sf a.n + 1]
}

pii sa range(int v) {
	if (v < sf a.n - 1) return {le[v] + 1, ri[v] + 1}
	return {v - sf a.n + 1, v - sf a.n + 2}
}

pii find str(const string& t) {
	int v = root
	rep(i, 0, sz(t)) {
		if (i == len lcp range(v)) {
			v = get child(v, t[i])
			if (v == -1) return {0, 0}
		}
		int sa le = sa range(v).first
		if (sf a.s[sf a.sa[sa le] + i] != t[i]) return {0, 0}
	}
	return sa range(v)
}

const int mn = '0',
					cnt let =
						36
struct bwt {
	int n
	char last
	vector<array<int, cnt let>> occ
	array<int, cnt let + 1> cnt{}
	bwt(const string& s, const vi& sa):
		n(sz(s)), last(empty(s) ? -1 : s.back() - mn),
		occ(n + 1) {
		rep(i, 0, n) {
			cnt[s[i] + 1 - mn]++
			occ[i + 1] = occ[i]
			if (sa[i] == 0) continue
			occ[i + 1][s[sa[i] - 1] - mn]++
		}
		partial sum(all(cnt), begin(cnt))
	}
	array<vi, 2> find str(const string& t) {
		vi le(sz(t) + 1, 0), ri(sz(t) + 1, n)
		for (int i = sz(t) - 1; i >= 0; i--) {
			char c = t[i] - mn
			le[i] = cnt[c] + occ[le[i + 1]][c] +
							(c == last && i < sz(t) - 1)
			ri[i] = cnt[c] + occ[ri[i + 1]][c] + (c == last)
		}
		return {le, ri}
	}
}

const int mn = 'a',
					cnt let = 26
struct trie {
	struct node {
		array<int, cnt let> next
		int cnt words = 0, par = -1
		char ch
		node(int a par = -1, char a ch = '#'):
			par(a par), ch(a ch) {
			fill(all(next), -1)
		}
	}
	vector<node> t
	trie(): t(1) {}
	void insert(const string& s) {
		int v = 0
		for (char ch : s) {
			int u = ch - mn
			if (t[v].next[u] == -1) {
				t[v].next[u] = sz(t)
				t.emplace back(v, ch)
			}
			v = t[v].next[u]
		}
		t[v].cnt words++
	}
	int find(const string& s) {
		int v = 0
		for (char ch : s) {
			int u = ch - mn
			if (t[v].next[u] == -1) return 0
			v = t[v].next[u]
		}
		return t[v].cnt words
	}
}

template<class t> vi prefix function(const t& s) {
	vi pi(sz(s))
	rep(i, 1, sz(s)) {
		int j = pi[i - 1]
		while (j > 0 && s[i] != s[j]) j = pi[j - 1]
		pi[i] = j + (s[i] == s[j])
	}
	return pi
}

template<class t>
vi lcs queries(const t& s, const t& t,
							 const vector<array<int, 3>>& queries) {
	int n = sz(s), m = sz(t), q = sz(queries)
	vector<vector<array<int, 3>>> qs(n)
	rep(i, 0, q) {
		auto [s ri, t le, t ri] = queries[i]
		if (s ri == 0 || t le == m) continue
		qs[s ri - 1].push back({t le, t ri, i})
	}
	lcs dp lcs(t)
	vi res(q)
	rep(i, 0, n) {
		lcs.push onto s(s[i])
		vi init(m), dp inv(m, -1)
		rep(j, 0, m) {
			if (lcs.dp[j] == -1) init[j] = 1
			else dp inv[lcs.dp[j]] = j
		}
		bit<int> bit(init)
		sort(all(qs[i]))
		int j = 0
		rep(t le, 0, m) {
			while (j < sz(qs[i]) && qs[i][j][0] == t le)
				res[qs[i][j][2]] = bit.query(t le, qs[i][j][1]),
													 j++
			if (dp inv[t le] != -1) bit.update(dp inv[t le], 1)
		}
	}
	return res
}

template<class t> struct lcs dp {
	t t
	vi dp
	lcs dp(const t& a t): t(a t), dp(sz(t)) {
		iota(all(dp), 0)
	}
	void push onto s(int c) {
		int v = -1
		rep(i, 0, sz(t)) if (c == t[i] || dp[i] < v)
			swap(dp[i], v)
	}
}

template<class t> struct kmp {
	t t
	vi pi
	kmp(const t& a t): t(a t), pi(prefix function(t)) {}
	vi find str(const t& s) {
		vi matches
		int j = 0
		rep(i, 0, sz(s)) {
			while (j > 0 && t[j] != s[i]) j = pi[j - 1]
			j += (t[j] == s[i])
			if (j == sz(t)) {
				matches.push back(i - sz(t) + 1)
				j = pi[j - 1]
			}
		}
		return matches
	}
}

vector<vl> make powers(const vl& v) {
	int n = sz(v)
	vector<vl> pws(3, vl(n))
	rep(i, 0, n) {
		pws[0][i] = v[i]
		pws[1][i] = v[i] * v[i]
		pws[2][i] = v[i] * v[i] * v[i]
	}
	return pws
}
template<class f>
vector<bool> wildcard pattern matching(const vl& s,
																			 const vl& t, f conv) {
	int n = sz(s), m = sz(t)
	auto s pws = make powers(s)
	auto t pws = make powers(t)
	for (auto& t pw : t pws) reverse(all(t pw))
	vector<vl> res(3)
	rep(pw hay, 0, 3) res[pw hay] =
		conv(s pws[pw hay], t pws[2 - pw hay])
	vector<bool> mtch(n - m + 1)
	rep(i, 0, n - m + 1) {
		int id = i + m - 1
		auto num = res[0][id] - 2 * res[1][id] + res[2][id]
		mtch[i] = num == 0
	}
	return mtch
}

mt19937 rng(
	chrono::steady clock::now().time since epoch().count())
template<class t> t rnd(t le, t ri) {
	assert(le <= ri)
	return uniform int distribution<t>(le, ri)(rng)
}

struct ladder {
	int n
	vector<vi> b tbl, l tbl
	vi d, p, dl
	ladder(const vector<vi>& adj):
		n(sz(adj)), l tbl(n), d(n), p(n, -1), dl(n) {
		auto dfs = [&](auto&& self, int v) -> void {
			dl[v] = v
			for (int u : adj[v])
				if (u != p[v]) {
					d[u] = d[p[u] = v] + 1
					self(self, u)
					if (d[dl[u]] > d[dl[v]]) dl[v] = dl[u]
				}
		}
		rep(i, 0, n) if (p[i] == -1) p[i] = i, dfs(dfs, i)
		b tbl = treejump(p)
		rep(i, 0, n) if (p[i] == i || dl[p[i]] != dl[i]) {
			int leaf = dl[i]
			vi& lad = l tbl[leaf]
			lad.resize(min(2 * (d[leaf] - d[i]), d[leaf] + 1),
								 leaf)
			rep(j, 1, sz(lad)) lad[j] = p[lad[j - 1]]
		}
	}
	int kth par(int v, int k) {
		if (k == 0) return v
		int bit =   lg(k)
		v = b tbl[bit][v], k -= (1 << bit)
		int leaf = dl[v]
		return l tbl[leaf][k + d[leaf] - d[v]]
	}
}

struct linear kth par {
	struct node {
		int d, p = -1, idx, dl
		vi lad
	}
	vector<node> t
	vi j
	linear kth par(const vector<vi>& adj):
		t(sz(adj)), j(2 * sz(t)) {
		vi st
		int pos = 1
		auto add j = [&]() -> void {
			j[pos] = st[max(0, sz(st) - 1 - 2 * (pos & -pos))]
			pos++
		}
		auto dfs = [&](auto&& self, int v) -> void {
			st.push back(v)
			t[v].idx = pos
			t[v].dl = v
			add j()
			for (int u : adj[v])
				if (u != t[v].p) {
					t[u].d = t[t[u].p = v].d + 1
					self(self, u)
					if (t[t[u].dl].d > t[t[v].dl].d)
						t[v].dl = t[u].dl
					add j()
				}
			st.pop back()
		}
		rep(i, 0, sz(t)) if (t[i].p == -1) t[i].p = i,
																						 dfs(dfs, i)
		rep(i, 0, sz(t)) if (
			t[i].p == i || t[t[i].p].dl != t[i].dl) {
			int leaf = t[i].dl
			vi& lad = t[leaf].lad
			lad.resize(
				min((t[leaf].d - t[i].d) * 7 / 2, t[leaf].d + 1),
				leaf)
			rep(k, 1, sz(lad)) lad[k] = t[lad[k - 1]].p
		}
	}
	int kth par(int v, int k) {
		switch (k) {
		case 0:
			return v
		case 1:
